versus interspecific? and (2) what is
the evolutionary history of color variation in the S. jarrovii complex ? Parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of
DNA sequence data (1.8 kb) from the mitochondrial 12S and ND4 genes for 17+ populations of Sceloporus jarrovii
(including the type localities of all seven subspecies) and several related species, along with morphological data,
suggest the following preliminary results: (1) Sceloporus jarrovii is polyphyletic within the torquatus species group
and consists of at least four evolutionary species, (2) striking color variation exists both within and between the
evolutionary species currently referred to S. jarrovii, (3) most of the conspicuous male color morphs seem to have
evolved independently from relatively dull colored monochromatic ancestors, and the blue color morph has evolved
twice.




   200                         16:00 Saturday                               CF112                             CHM
Molecular systematics and phylogeography of the salt marsh snakes, Nerodia clarkii, using mtDNA d-loop
sequences. K.P. Jansen. S.A. Karl and H.R. Mushinsky, Department of Biology, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33620-5150 USA.
The salt marsh snake, Nerodia clarkii, is the only North American snake species restricted to brackish water habitats
and has evolved unique physiological and behavioral specializations associated with a saline environment. Two of
the three subspecies (A/, c. compressicauda and N. c. taeniata} are endemic to Florida and are threatened by
progressive destnjction of coastal wetland habitat. By using the subspecies as the focal taxonomic division in
consen/ation and management programs, we imply that the subspecies Is an independent evolutionary lineage worth
protecting. As such, the taxonomic status and evolutionary history of subspecies must be ascertained prior to
implementing conservation or management programs. Markers used in delineating two of the three subspecies have
been vague or highly variable and have failed to consistently differentiate individuals of known identity Into their
respective taxonomic group. Further, the divergence of the salt marsh snakes from an ancestral freshwater form
near the end of the Pliocene has been theorized, but with varying models. We sequenced the mtDNA control region
of individuals from the Nerodia clarkii subspecies, Nerodia fasciata subspecies, and several outgroup taxa in order to
elucidate the relationship among the salt marsh snakes and to better understand the evolutionary history of the
group.




   201               . . .   . 16:30,Satufday                               CR9                               CHM
Comparison of helminth communities in montane and lowland populations of the western fence lizard,
Sceloporus occldentalls from Los Angeles County, Califomia. S.R. Goldberg. Whittier College, Department of
Biology, Whittier, CA 90608 USA; C.R. Bursey, Pennsylvania State University, Department of Biology, Shenango
Campus, Sharon, PA 16146 USA; H. Cheam, Whittier College, Department of Biology, Whittier, CA 90608 USA.
Five hundred seventy two Sceloporus oeddentatis from two nearby populations in Los Angeles County, Califomia
were examined for helminths: 200 from the San Gabriel Mountains (montane ca. 1584 m elevation) and 372 from the
Puente Hills, Whittier (lowland ca. 150 m elevation). The component helminth community of the montane fence
lizard population consisted of four species: two species of cestodes, Mesocestoides sp. and Oochoristica scelopori
and two species of nematodes, Physaloptera retusa and Spauligodon giganticus. The component helminth
community of the lowland fence lizard population contained three species: Mesocestoides sp., Physaloptera retusa
and unidentified acuariid larvae. The two helminth communities were dissimilar in composition. Each host
population must be examined; helminth community composition cannot be assumed.

   202                         16:45 Saturday                                CR9               .       .        CHM
Trematode parasitism of the Canadian red-sided garter snake {Thamnqphls sirtalls parletalis): A study in
prevalence and Intensity. D.R. Kelly and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700 West
103 Street, Chicago, Illinois 60655 USA.
One-hundred and ninety-four Canadian red-sided garter snakes were collected from the Interiake region north of
Winnipeg, Manitoba, over a two year period, in the spring and fall seasons of 1996 and 1997. This snake is host to a
lung inhabiting digenetic trematode of the family Pfagiorchiidae. The infection is acquired by the comsumption of
tadpoles and frogs. These intermediate hosts harbor the metacercarial cysts that may further develop into mature,
egg producing adults, when consumed. It has been reported that the minimum time requirement for the appearance
of an adult trematode in the lung is greater than eight weeks. All snakes examined for trematode infection were
preserved, measured for length, and gender determined. The adult trematodes were counted and removed, with their
locations being recorded. The data were used to evaluate ths prevalence (percent rate of infection) and intensity
(number of parasites per host). The prevalence of the trematode infection was higher in females (35%) than in males
(15%). The mean intensity was also higher in females (10+2, range: 1-65) than in males (5+1, range: 1-13). No
significant correlation between intensity and snout-vent length was found in either sex. However, there is evidence to
suggest that prevalence increses with snout-vent length. A group of long term captive (> 12 weeks) snakes were
compared to the sample of wild snakes. There were no significant differences in the mean intensities of the wild and
long-term captive animals. However, the prevalence in the females increased from 35% to 53% and increased in
males from 15% to 30%.




   203                         13:00 Saturday                                CF3                                AXL
The Influence of moonlight, temperature, hydrostatic pressure and zooplankton abundance upon the vertical
distribution and relative abundance of mesopelagic fishes in the epipelagic zone at night. T.C. MacDonald.
Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Avenue S.E., St. Petersburg, FL USA , 33701; T.L. Hopkins, Department
of Marine Science, University of South Florida, 140 7th Ave. S., St. Petersburg, FL USA 33701.
Four cniises, with a 4-m’ Multiple Opening/Closing Net and Environmental Sensing System (MOCNESS), were
conducted to investigate the influence of moonlight, temperature, hydrostatic pressure and zooplankton abundance
upon the nighttime vertical distribution and relative abundance of mesopelagic micronekton in the epipelagic zone of
tile eastern Gulf of Mexico. Two hundred and fifteen trawl hauls, sampling discrete 25-meter depth strata between
the surface and 175 meters, were completed. Environmental parameters (temperature, hydrostatic pressure and
moon phase) and zooplankton abundance were recorded for each trawl haul. Additionally, measurements of ths
nighttime light field and diffuse attenuation coefficient were recorded during two 1989 cruises. Vertical distributions
fertile abundant fish species tended to be shallower during new moon phases. Two statistical methods (Canonical
Correspondence Analysis and Analysis of Covariance) indicated that hydrostatic pressure, temperature and moon
phase influenced the relative abundances of fishes and that light at depth was especially important in influencing
relative abundances during the 1989 cruises. Despite the importance of light at depth, the abundant species were
not limited to specific levels of ambient light




  '204                         13:15 Saturday                                CF3 .    .                          AXL
Effect of liqht on juvenile walleye pollock shoaling and their Interaction with predators. C.H. Rver. Alaska
Fisheries Science Center, NMFS, NOAA, Hatfield Marine Science Center, Newport, Oregon 97365 USA.
Under a 12 hr light/12 hr dark photoperiod, juvenile walleye pollock displayed a diurnal schooling and activity
pattern, characterized by cohesive shoaling during the day, with a cessation of shoaling and decreased swimming
speeds at night. Juvenile walleye pollock were not characterized by a distinct light threshold for shoaling; shoals
gradually dispersed as light levels decreased and gradually recoalesced as light levels increased. At light levels
below 2.8x10 ° mEs 'm’^ juvenile walleye pollock were so dispersed as to no longer constitute a shoal.
Exposure to simulated predation had differing effects upon fish behavior under light and dark conditions. Brief
exposure to a model predator in the dark, caused fish to swim faster than fish which had been exposed in the light.
Chronic exposure to a living predator produced similar results; fish tended to swim slower when a predator was
present in the light, but faster when a predator was present in the dark. In the light, predation can result in cohesive
shoals, but in the dark. Increased activity may accelerate shoal dispersal, suggesting that perceived predation risk
has opposite effects upon the spatial distribution of shoaling fish under light and dark conditions.   205                       , 13:30 Saturday                                CF3                                AXL
Prey-type effect on raking behavior In the osteoglossomorph fish ChHala chltala.                  B.J. Frost and C.P.J.
Sanford, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY 11549 USA.
Fishes of the subdivision Osteoglossomorpha ("bony tongues") posses a functional novelty the "tongue-bite
apparatus," located between the mandibular jaw apparatus anteriorly and the pharyngeal jaw apparatus posteriorly.
Previous work on this group described a distinct behavior known as "raking" associated with this novel feeding
mechanism. Using high-speed video (250 fields s ') and stop-frame kinematic analysis, raking behavior for two prey
types (earthworms and goldfish) was characterized in the clown knifefish {Chitala chitala}. Kinematic data will be
presented that reveals raking is a modulated behavior.




   206                         13:45 Saturday.                               CF3                   ..             AXL
Feeding ecology, activity patterns and spatial distribution of Siluriformes in a stream of Atlantic rainforest in
south-eastern Brazil. S. Buck. Universidade de Sao Paulo - Instifufo de Biociencias, Departamento de Zoologia,
PO BOX 11461, ZIP 05422-970, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil.
The Atlantic rainforest ichthyofauna is rich in siluriforms, with many endemic species. Seyenly percent of the species
recorded in the Betari stream. Upper Ribeira Valley, Eastern Brazilian basin, are siluriforms belonging to the
following families: Loricariidae (eight species), Pimelodidae (four species), Trichomycteridae (two species) and
Callichthyidae (one species). Between June 1996 and February 1998,1 studied spatial distribution, activity patterns,
and feeding ecology of these fishes in a stream section one lelometer long. Diurnal and nocturnal transects were
made at different sites using snorkelling. Half of the studied species are distributed in patties, which water current,
depth and type of substrate influencing their distribution patterns. Except tor Otocinclus gibbosus (Loricariidae) and
Thchomycterus davisi (Trichomycteridae) all other siluriforms studied are nocturnal. The loricariids graze on algae
covering rock, mosriy diatoms, organic detritus and sediment. Corydoras barbatus (Callichthyidae) feeds on aquatic
insects and algae. The pimelodids are generalists carnivores, with Rhamdia quelen preying on fish and crustaceans,
and Rhamdioglanis frenatus preying on aquatic invertebrataes, especially insects (Trichoptera). This study is a
contribution to the knowledge on me poorly known ichthyofauna from the Atlantic rainforest.




   207                         14:00 Saturday                                CF3                    AXL
Diet overlap and resource use by five species of butterflyfish (Family Chaetodontidae) in Fiji.  D. Goulet,
Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA; J. Mayer, Department of Natural
Sciences, Long Island University, NY 11968 USA; A.I. Mazeroll, Department of Life, Earth and Environmental
Sciences, West Texas A&M University, Canyon, TX 79016-0808 USA.
We investigated the applicability of five species of butterflyfish as biological indicators on the Great Astrolabe Reef,
Fiji. Availability and patterns of resource use by the butterflyfish were investigated. Individuals of 3-13 pairs of each
species were followed and feeding rates and foraging areas were recorded. For four of the five species of
butterflyfish, acroporid corals constituted the dominant food in the diet, Chaetodon pelewensis and C. citrinellus were
not obligate corallivores, feeding upon coralline algae and filamentous algae. The remaining species were obligate
corallivores. Chaetodon trifascialis and C. baronessa showed a preference tor acroporid corals and can be
considered feeding specialists. Chaetodon trifasdatus is a feeding generalist, with no clear preference for any of a
wide variety of corals in the diet. Among specialists and generalists diet overlap was high, but between specialists
and generalists there was less diet overlap. In addition, foraging areas of the different species overlapped, in some
cases almost 100%, suggesting that food resources are being shared.

   208              . .       .1,4:15 Saturday                               CF3                                AXL
Influences of an exotic cordgrass on estuarine fish diets in Willapa Bay, WA. D.J. Stouder. Ohio Cooperative
Rsh & Wildlife Research Unit, Department of. Zoology, The Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Ave., Columbus OH
43210 USA; K.L. Fresh, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia USA.
Invasions of introduced species as a result of human activities have had huge impacts on aquatic ecosystems.
Furthermore, introduced species may become permanent components of these ecosystems. As a consequence it
becomes important for scientists and managers to understand the physical and biological processes within these
rapidly changing environments. We examined the effects of Spartina altemiflora invasion within an estuary along the
Washington coast. Between April and September in 1994 & 1995, we sampled fishes over mudflats and within
differently sized Spartina clones (3m, 6m, 12m, and meadows). Distribution and abundance of native fishes varied
both temporally and spatially as a consequence of the presence or absence of Spartina, as clones grew seasonally
and as different fishes recruited to the area. Cymatogaster, Leptocottus, and Oncorhynchus diets failed to
correspond to habitat use differences. Instead, their diets reflected a mix of prey derived from mudflat and Spartina-
inhabited areas. In addition to a prey mix reflective of habitats, fishes consumed large proportions of exotic prey
species (i.e., cumaceans, amphipods). The invasion of exotic species to this estuary probably proceeded along
several paths, however, the irnpact of aquaculture practices and culturing of a non-native oyster species most likely
had the greatest influence.




   209                          14:30 Saturday .                             CF3                                AXL
The relationship between the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus, and the cestode parasite
Schistocephalus solidus In Walby Lake, Alaska; new perspectives of the host-parasite system. D.C. Heins
and S.S. Singer, Department of EEO Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, 70118 USA; J.A. Baker,
Department of Biology, Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610 USA.
The threespine stickleback is an intermediate host of the cestode Schistocephalus solidus. Prior research has led to
the hypothesis that selection has resulted in a delay of the deleterious effects of Schistocephalus on stickleback until
after stickleback complete reproduction. Other research has concluded that any heavily infected female stickleback
are unlikely to spawn because Schistocephalus delays or inhibits ovarian maturation. The intensity, prevalence, and
severity of infection of stickleback from Walby Lake, Alaska, are inconsistent with the results of previous
investigations, showing that reproduction and high levels of infection may occur. Our data suggest there may be
previously unobserved adverse effects of parasitism on clutch parameters in parasitized stickleback females. We
will discuss possible reasons for the differences we have observed for Walby Lake after contrasting our results with
Uiose of previous studies.




   210                         14:45 Saturday . .                            CF3                                AXL
Population ecology of Rhamdioglanis ffenatus and PImelodella transitoria (Siluriformes: Pimelodidade) in a
stream from the atlantic rainforest, south-eastern Brazil. P. Gerhard. Institute de Bicciencias da Universidade
de Sao Paulo, Departamento de Zoologia, Rua rfo Matao, travessa 14, # 321, Butanta - Sao Paulo - SP, ZIP 05508-
900, BRAZIL.
Population ecology of Rhamdioglanis Irenatus and Pimelodella transitoria from the Betari river. Upper Ribeira Valley,
State of Sao Paulo, was studied by the mark-recapture method between Mar. 1987 and Feb. 1998. After eleven
monthly collections, 171 specimens of R. frenatus and 104 of P. transitoria longer than 80 mm SL were marked by
tattooing in a 2.000 m section of the river. Preliminary estimates indicate populations sizes of 300-500 individuals for
R. frenatus and 800-2500 for P. transitoria, with populations densities varying between 0.01-0.02 and 0.04-0.12
individuals m'® respectively. These catfishes are sedentary, being recaptured at the same site of previous collections
at rates as high as 85% for R. frenatus and 95% for P. transitoria. Upstream and Downstream movements were
recorded, without dear tendencies. Individual growth rates for R. frenatus and P. transitoria were 0.2 cm month-' and
less than 0.1 cm month ', respectively, but preliminary data indicate those rales may double in the rainy season.
Microhabitat distribution data obtained from captures indicate preference for pools and low migration rates betweens
pools in both species. Rhamdioglanis frenatus is solitary, while P. transitoria is gregarious, specially during daytime.The role of trenelent predators In regulating |uvenlle reef fleh abundance on small patch reefs: a preliminary
examination. D.S. Gilliam. R.L. Sherman and R.E. Spieler, Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center,
8000 N. Ocean Dr., Oania, FL 33004 USA.

As part of an ongoing research program designed to investigate local reef fish recruitment processes, the importance
of post-settlement predation was examined. A series of recently completed experiments manipulated prey refugia
and resident fish abundance on small (1 m3) model patch reefs. Although these experiments were not designed to
determine the relative importance of resident versus transient predators, a portion of the data obtained, as well as
ancillary observations, support the hypothesis that transient predators (e.g. Carangids) have an important role in
regulating juvenile reef fish abundance. At the very least, our results indicate that specific studies are required to
elucidate the influence of transient predators on sm^l patch reef fish assemblages. The aim of this presentation is to
stimulate further discussion on the processes that regulate reef fish assemblages.




   212                        15:45 Saturday                               CFS                                AXL
Gradual versus event-related change in fish assemblages of pools in a small midwestem stream.                    W.J.
Matthews, Department of Zoology and Biological Station, Uiiiversity of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019; E.G. Marsh-
Matthews. Museum of Natural History and Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA.
Fish assemblages in 14 individual pools within a 1-km reach of Brier Creek, Oklahoma, were censused by snorkeling
on 17 dates from 1982 to 1997, with inten/als between surveys ranging from 2 weeks to II years. During our period
of sampling some intervals included major floods or drought, whereas other Interv^s were ’benign*. We
summarized terr^oral variation in fish assemblages in individual pools and for the entire reach, and compared the
magnitude of changes in pool assemblages during periods with and without "events’. Fish assemblages in individual
pools changed more in response to gradual than to event-related effects. Cows affect stream fishes more than do
even rather large floods.




   213                        16:00 Saturday                                CF3                               /\XL
Aquatic, terrestrial and "global* landscape factors: which most influence local stream fish assemblages?
E.C. Marsh-Matthews. Museum of Natural History and Biological Sunrey, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019 USA; W.J. Matthews, Department of Zoology and Biological Station, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019 USA.
Stream fish ecology offers conflicting hypotheses about environmental and landscape factors controlling local
assemblage structure, at scales from local ’microhabitat" to "global" or macroecological. Using a large, time-
delimited data base, spanning a wide range of local settings in midwestem North America, we tested suites of
physical or landscape factors as predictors of stnjcture or emergent properties of local fish assemblages, at scales
rncluding: (1) "within reach" (aquatic); (2) local area (terrestrial); and (3) within basin, and (4)among named river
basins. In June-July 1995, we sampled stream fishes at 65 sites spanning 1700 km across Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas,
Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas. At each site all apparent microhabitats were sampled, and environmental or
landscape variables were documented. "Global* factors (rainfall, meteorological) were obtained from standard
references. Basin identity* explained much variation in composition of local fish assemblages as reflected by scores
of "sites" in a DCA based on abundance. In a PCA including all environmental/landscape variables, latitude (a
surrogate for "basin identity") was related strongly to fish assemblage composition. On the other hand, emergent
properties of assemblages (e.g., richness) were not influenced by basin or latitude. Subsequent PCAs, based
separately on wifhin-reach "aquatic" dnd local area "terrestrial" factors showed that landscape within the stream
(depth, current, presence of gravel patches) influenced species richness more than extrinsic terrestrial factors.

    .M                         1'8.1 b Saturday                              CF3                                AXL
The estuarine artenmlnimum: evidence from the lower Chesapeake Bay. C.M. Wagner. College of William &
Mary, School of Marine Science, P.O. Box 1346, Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USA.

The dramatic biological, chemical, and physical changes in the low salinity habitats of estuaries are thought to limit
the number of resident faunal taxa. Remane (1934) first described this phenomena, a species minimum occurring
near oligohaline salinities (5-8 %»), from invertebrate assemblages of large stable brackish lakes. It has since been
proffered as a general feature of the estuarine gradient, though examples from the primary literature are rare. Two
possible complications to the location of this pattern in estuarine fishes are: (1) the large number of seasonal
migratory species who exhibit changing salinity preferences with ontogeny; and, (2) ths failure to standardize species
richness estimates to a measure of sample size (i.e., rarefaction). I applied rarefaction techniques to seine and trawl
survey data to investigate whether this phenomena is evident in fish assemblages from three tributaries of the lower
Chesapeake Bay. Results of the analysis indicate a minimum can occur, and is most evident in systems with a
physically long salinity gradient. Beta diversity calculations confirmed the region of highest species turnover was
displacer] upstream from the minimum (near 0-2 %e), and coincides with the most severe changes in ionic ratios.
Hence, distance to source pools of marine and freshwater taxa appears to interact with salinity preferences to
establish ths minimum. Excursions from most favorable habitats by a highly mobile species appears spatially similar
to recnjitment survival in sessile invertebrates, and may explain the similarity in pattern between the two groups.




   215          .   ...        16:30 Saturday                                CF3                               AXL
Reproduction and early ontogeny of the sand diver, Trichonotus setiger, from Papua New Guinea.
Balon. Axelrod Institute of Ichthyology University of Guelph; E. Clark, Department of Zoology, University of
Maryland: C. Flegler-Balon, Axelrod Institute of Ichthyology University of Guelph; L.M. Benveniste, 277 West 10th
St, Apt. 6H, New York.
Obsenration Point at the northwest end of Normanby Island (Milne Bay Province) is the home of a taxocene with four
to five species of sand divers, Trichonotus, one of them ths recently described T. halstead. In 1997 and 1998 we
returned to study their early life history. Purported gill-chamber brooding was not confirmed by dissections of many
specimens. The sympatric species live in distinct harem territories or swarms on a sandy slope where they mate
soon after sunrise. T. setiger, mating over coarse sand, deposit many small eggs. Mature females (~ 8.7 cm TL) had
ovaries with 150 to 200 ooc^es. When mating is over, eggs were scooped up with sand from the mating siterushed
into the boat, and observed live under special microscopes. Deposited translucent eggs (0.6 mm ) stick to the sand
grains. The clear yolk contains one large yellowish oil globule. Development was observed at 25-26° C: after 30 min,
four cells had formed. Ten hours later, heart beat and blood circulation could be seen. Hatching occurred 13-13.5
hours after spawning. The just hatched embryos (oa. 2.2 mm TL, >38 somites) were translucent with completely
unpigmented eyes. Initially the embryos were mostly resting at the bottom, occasionally wriggling, later darting
around and into ths water column. When motionless, they slowly sank head first. At 18 h a white pigment was
obsenred around the anus, later white pigment accumulated around the notochord towards the tip of the tail, and
finally in the head region. When one day old (3 mm TL) the yolksac had decreased in size; initially, the oil globule
was about 1/4 of the yolksac length, now it took 1/3 of yolk size. At age two days the embryos had reached a TL of
4.5 mm. The snout region had become more pointed but neither jaw movements nor gut contents were observed, i.e.
exogenous feeding was not yet started . These findings will be discussed with respect to the distribution of the sand
divers and a possible direct development without a planktonic larva, a rare thing in coral reef fishes.

   216                         16:45 Saturday                               CF3                                /\XL
Characterization of feeding types of Northwest Atlantic shelf fishes.                  R.A. Rountree. University of
Massachusetts-Amherst, 48 Oregon Rd., Mashpee, MA 02649, USA; N.J. McHugh, W.L. Michaels, C.G. Milliken and
R.M. Yetter, NMFS, Northeast Fisheries Science Center, 166 Water St. Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.
Food habits data collected on Northeast Fisheries Science Center groundfish surveys between Nova Scotia and
Cape Fear from 1981-1990 were analyzed to categorize abundant species info feeding types (e.g., piscivorus,
molluscivonjs, etc..), and to examine changes in feeding types through ontogeny. Over 83,000 stomach samples
from 51 species (13 elasmobranch, 36 teleost, and 2 cephalopod species) were included in the analysis. Predator
feeding types representing primary reliance on Annelida (Cl^tocephalus cynoglossus, Pleuronectes americanus
and Pleuronectes ferrugineus}, Arthropoda (9 species including 4 > 80%: Sebastes fasciatus. Scomber scombrus.
Raja senta, and Mustelus canis}, Mollusca (Myliobatis freminvillei and Merlucdus albidus}, Echinodermata
{Hippoglossoides platessoides'), and Fish (17 species including 4 > 90%: Pomatomus saltatrix, Carchaihinus
plumbeus, Synodus foetens, and Lophius americanus} were found. Other prey groups were relatively unimportant.
The remaining 18 species did not rely primarily on any one group. We also describe feeding types based on the
observed patterns of change among 5-10 cm predator size classes. For example, a primary piscivore (e.g. Lcfihius
americanus} relies predominately on fish throughout its sampled size range, while a positive secondary piscivore
increases (e.g., Meriuccius bilinearis, Gadus morhua}, and a negative secondary piscivore decreases (Pomatomus
saltatrirl), its reliance on fish as it grows.   217                         17:00 Saturday                              CF3                                AXL
The Influence of riparian buffer strips on fishes; are we measuring the right things? G.S. Hellman and J.O.
Harper. Institute of Ecology. University of Georgia. Athens. GA 30602 USA; D.B. Jones III. CH2M Hill. 115 Perimeter
Center Place NE. Atlanta. GA 30346 USA; P.V. Bolstad. Department of Forest Resources. University of Minnesota.
St. Paul. MN 55108 USA.
Discussions of the influence of riparian vegetation on stream health focus on the width of such buffer zones. Policy
decisions and environmental regulations similarly use riparian width as the metric of importance. We sampled
fishes and stream habitats in 12 stream segments downstream from deforested riparian patches 0 - 5.6 km long, all
downslope from densely forested watersheds. We found that the strongest predictors of fish abundance and
occunenca were area and particularly length of the riparian patch; patch width was a relatively poor predictor of fish
occurrence. Limited riparian clearing may cause minor disturbance to the fish assemblage, but streams in even a
heavily forested watershed cannot tolerate disruption of the riparian zone of much more than 1 km in length.
Riparian buffer length should be given stronger consideration in stream protection and restoration plans.




   218                         08:00 Sunday                                  17                               QVC
Sensory mechanisms underpinning feeding behavior In elasmobranchs. J.C. Montgomery. School of Biological
Sciences, University of Auckland; C. Thornbum, Kelly Tarlton's Underwater World, Auckland.
Elasmobranchs have some sophisticated feeding strategies, ranging from tail clipping bill-fishes, to locating
concentrations of patchily distributed prey. These strategies are underpinned by an equally sophisticated array of
sensory systems. To fake one example, many rays feed on buried bivalves, and dig where the prey densities are
high (Hine ef al. 1997). Behavioral studies (Montgomery and Skipworth, 1997) illustrate the potential importance of
mechanosensory systems in this feeding behavior. Both mechanosensory and electrosensory systems share a high
level of sensitivity, to the extent that behaviorally relevant inputs could be swamped by self-generated noise. One
interesting aspect of the sensory biology of elasmobranchs is that hindbrain signal processing effectively resolves
this problem (Montgomeryand Bodnzick, 1994).




   219                         08:15 Sunday                                  17                              QVC
Selective foraging behaviour of basking sharks on zooplankton in tidal fronts. D.W. Sims and V.A. Quayle,
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Plymouth. Drake Circus. Plymouth. PL4 8AA. U.K.
 Individual and grouped basking sharks {Cetorhinus maximus} filter-feeding on zooplankton at the water's surface
were tracked visually together with zooplankton sampling from their feeding paths. Along tidal slicks they exhibited
area-restricted searching behaviour and actively selected areas containing high densities of large zooplankton
above a threshold level. Basking sharks remainerf in the most profitable patches transported by tidal currents for up
to 27h and moved between patches over 24-48h periods. Between years, the location of shark foraging areas
changed according to ths effects of prevailing weather conditions on frontal boundary sharpness and the
maintenance of frontal upwellings. Our results snow that basking sharks are selective filter-feeders on specific
zooplankton assemblages and therefore useful as biological indicators of abundance trends in zooplankton species
influenced by climatic fluctuations of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).

   220                          08:30 Sunday.                                  IT                              QVC
Evolutionary Innovations in the feeding mechanism of elasmobranchs. C.D. Wilga. Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology. University of California. In/ine. Irvine. CA 92697 USA; P.C. Wainwright, Department of
Biological Science, , Florida State Univeristy, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA; P.J. Motta, Department of Biology,
University of South Florida, 4202 Fowler Ave., Tampa. FL 33620 USA.
A major conclusion from comparative studies of feeding mechanisms in lower vertebrates is that some of the
biomechanical couplings involved in mouth opening have been retained throughout evolution. However, recent
studies of the jaw mechanism indicate that elasmobranchs differ from other lower vertebrates in that the
geniohyoideus coupling is the primary mechanism for lower jaw depression rather than the rectus cervicus coupling.
In addition, previous studies of the feeding mechanism in lower vertebrates indicate that structural differences among
taxa may arise by the addition of a novel stnrcture or as a result of modification of the existing musculoskeletal
apparatus. Accompanying such changes, the ancestral motor pattern may be retained or the timing of motor activity
may be altered. Evolutionary innovations in the musculoskeletal apparatus mediating upper jaw protrusion in
elasmobranchs has involved both the addition of a novel feature, the dorsal preorbitalis coupling, and by the
modification of an existing structure, the levator palatoquadrafi coupling, while retaining the ancestral system, the
ventral preorbitalis coupling. These changes in the musculoskeletal apparatus have Involved conservation of the
motor pattern in the ancestral mechanism and alteration of the motor pattern in the modified mechanism.




   221                          08:45 Sunday                                  17                               QVC
Suction feeding in sharks: a kinematic analysis of feeding in the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum. PJ._
Motta. University of South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Ave., Tampa, Florida, 33620 U.S A.
Despite relatively simple feeding mechanisms, sharks exhibit a variety of feeding types. Ancestral cladodont sharks
presumably grasped and possibly swallowed their prey whole. Modern sharfe have radiated to include biting,
gouging and biting, ram-feeding, suction-feeding, filter-feeding, and crushing types. Convergence and specialization
for suction feeding have arisen in a variety of divergent extant taxa. The orectolobiform nurse shark, Ginglymostoma
diratum, is a specialized and apparently obligate suction feeder. Kinematic analysis from high speed video of five
sharks reveals a conservative feeding sequence involving mandible depression and labial cartilage protrusion,
followed by mandible elevation and labial cartilage retraction. The expansive anti compressive phases are very rapid,
with a mean duration of 92 ms. Similar to other elasmobranchs, there is significant variability among sharks in nine
kinematic variables. Within sharks, bite durations are very constant as the sharks become satiated. The suction
feeding nurse shark differs from ram feeding carcharhinid sharks by its short and relatively constant durations of
mouth expansion, minimal contribution of palatoquadrate protrusron and cranial elevation, reduced dentition,
formation of a laterally enclosed and anteriorly directed mouth, and hypertrophied abductor muscles. Continuing
studies seek functional and evolutionary patterns in shark feeding.




 . 222                          09:00 Sunday                                  17                               QVC
Mechanics and modulation of prey capture in generalists vs. specialist predators: a kinematic comparison
using two carcharhiniform sharks. L.A. Ferry-Graham. University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2525 USA.

Recent work on teleosts suggests that attack kinematics (= behaviors) may be modified by a predator based on
specific attributes of the prey item Sharks are generally presumed to be highly visual predators and, thus, it is
reasonable to expect that they are also capable of such modulation. Work on swellsharks, Cephalosc^lium
ventriosum, however, indicated that prey size did not induce modulation. To determine the generality of this finding, I
investigated the effect of both prey size and elusivify on prey capture kinematics in a species with a more
generalized diet, the leopard shark, Triakis semitasciata. Sharks were filmed using high speed video feeding on two
sizes of ths same prey (shrimp pieces) and two mors elusive prey (earthworms and live mud shrimp). In leopard
sharks, size effects were noted for kinematic parameters related to buccal cavity expansion. Elusivity effects were
not detected for any parameters, but a performance consequence was also not detected with increasingly elusive
prey. These studies cumulatively suggest that rather than possessing a single attack behavior, generalists are
capable of kinematic modulation. They also suggest that the phrase ‘master of none* that is typically used to
describe a 'jack of all trades' generalist may not apply.A review of South African feeding studies of elasmobranch fishes: Perspectives and future directions. M.J.
Smala. Port Elizabeth Museum, P.O. Box 13147, Humewood, 6013, South Africa.
A review of the South African literature over ths last decade shows that more than 20 papers have been published
dealing with elasmobranch feeding, although many were part of general studies of their biology. They describe the
feeding of more than 50 elasmobranch species based on Identification of recently ingested prey. Accurate prey
Identification was possible in many studies using digestion-resistant prey hard parts such as cephalopod beaks and
fish otoliths, which allowed mote precise understanding of the impact of each species. The relationship between
predator size and prey choice is crucial but was often not described. Although such studies provide insights into
prey taken, on their own they are poor reflections of the complex interactions between predator and prey over time.
Studies of predator/prey interactions in the wild have been initiated and such studies are vital to clearer
understanding of predation. The large size of most chondrichthyans limits their suitability in laboratory based
experimental studies, but the rapid advances in the technology of electronic tracking devices is facilitating remote
data collection in ths wild, thereby augmenting direct obsenrations. This promising area of research has the potential
to clarify details of behaviour and feeding ecology that otherwise would be unobtainable.




   224                          09:30 Sunday        ..   . .         . .      ,17 ... ,                         OVC
Dietary changes associated with life history and sex for the sevengill shark: Implications for Intraspecific
comp^ition and resource partitioning. D.A. Ebert. US Abalone, P.O. Box 254, Davenport, CA. 95017, USA.

Dietary changes associated with life history stage and sex for the sevengill shark are analysized and discussed. Data
collected over a 15 year period were used to analyze ths sevengill shark's dietary habits. The size categories were
grouped so as to approximate this shark's life history stage; juvenile, adolescent, and adult. In addition, the diet of
male and female sharks of each life history stage was compared to note any differences between the sexes. Dietary
changes associated with an elasmobranchs life history and sexual stage of development may explain how food
resources within a given territory are partitioned such that competiton between conspecifics at different stages of life
may be reduced. A reduction in competition between conspecifics may have evolved to ensure that resource
partitioning and cannibalism would be reduced between conspecifics at different stages of life. Thus increasing
survivorship for the species during the critical early stages of life. The implications of dietary changes as related to
life history and sexual stage of development may be complex and far reaching, yet may play a critical role in the
success of elasmobranchs as a group.




   225. -                       09:45 Sunday                                  17                               OVC
The feeding ecology of elasmobranch fishes from the British Isles. J.R. Ellis and S J. Rogers, CEFAS Fisheries
Laboratory, Pakefleld Road, Lowestoft,, Suffolk, NR33 OHT, U.K.
The diets of inshore elasmobranchs from the waters of ths British Isles are reviewed from historical and
contemporary data. The feeding habits of ten of these species (Scyliorhinus canicula, Scylioihinus stellaris, Mustelus
asterias, G^eoriiinus galeus, Squab'na squab’na, Raja brachyura, R.clavata, R.microocellata, R.montaqui and
R.naevus) are discussed in relation to their comparative feeding ecology, their distributions in the Irish Sea and
English Channel, the demersal faunal assemblages to which they belong and their dentition.

Tapeworms as Indicators of elasmobranch feeding biology. J.N. Caira. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology, Univeisity of, Connecticut, Storrs, CT USA.
Tapeworms are potentially valuable indicators of elasmobranch feeding biology because their life cycles require
more than one host species and transmission between these host species is accomplished through predation. Thus,
tapeworms enter their elasmobranch hosts when the intermediate hosts in which they reside as lanrae are consumed
by elasmobranchs. The lack of life cycle data and lack of infonnation on degree of specificity for their final
Intermediate hosts currently limits the specific predictive value of tapeworms. However, some generalizations can be
made from the complete tapeworm assemblage observed in a host. Inconsistencies in the tapeworm assemblages
of related elasmobranch species can provide indirect evidence of differences in food habit. For example, the
tapeworms of megamouth are fully consistent with this shark's status as a filter feeder rather than an apex predator.
Changes in the tapeworm fauna of a host species over time may reflect age related changes in diet. For example,
the differences in the tapeworm fauna between small and large individuals of the Atlantic nurse shark may be
indicative of a shift in food habit. Depending on their specificity tor their intermediate hosts, tapeworms may act as
indicators of specific prey species consumed by a host species or Individuals.




   227                          10:45 Sunday                                   IT                               OVC
Standardized diet compositions and trophic levels of sharks. E. Cortes. Institute for Fishery Resource Ecology,
National Marine Rsheries Service/Florida State University, 3500 Delwood Beach Road, Panama City, FL 32408,
USA.
Sharks are marine consumers believed to occupy top positions in marine food webs. But surprisingly few
quantitativo estimates of trophic levels (TL) exist for this group. With the hope to better define the ecological role of
sharks in marine communities, this paper presents standardized diet compositions and trophic levels for a suite of
species. Dietary compositions were calculated from published quantitative studies using a weighted average index.
TL values of the eleven food types used to characterize the diet were obtained from published accounts and used to
calculate fractional trophic levels for 151 species representing seven orders and 21 families. Sharks as a group are
tertiary consumers (TL>4), and significant differences were found among six orders compared, attributable mainly to
differences between orectolobiformes and all other orders. Among four families of carcharhiniform sharks,
carcharhinids had significantly higher TL than triakids and scyliorhinids, but not sphymids. When compared to TL for
other top predators of marine communities obtained from the literature, mean TL for sharks was significantly higher
than for seabirds, but not for marine mammals. Trophic level and body size were positively correrated, with the fit
increasing when the three predominantly planktivorous species were omitted and when considering carcharhinids
only.




   228                          11:00 Sunday                                   17                                OVC
Review of rate of consumption, food transit and digestive efficiency in sharks.              B.M. Wetherbee. Zoology
Department, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA.
Sharks are important apex consumers In the marine environment and quantification of energy flow through sharks is
important for understanding their impact in marine ecosystems. However, there have been relatively few studies on
rates of consumption (daily ration) in sharks and it is difficult to generalize about the role of sharte in the flow of
energy in an ecosystem. Estimates of the daily ration of sharks generally either incorporate data on the duration and
rate of food emptying from the stomach and field observations on prey items ingested, or involve bioenergetic
models based on a balanced energy budget. Several factors that may influence rates of consumption are poorly
understood in elasmobranchs. There have been few studies on the efficiency of food digestion, absorption and
conversion to growth, and the passage of food through the digestive tract, despite the importance of these factors on
energy flow through the trophic level occupied by sharks. This study reviews the current state of knowledge on rates
of consumption, rates of food transit through the stomach and entire digestive tract, and the efficiency with which
ingested food is converted to energy stored as growth in sharks.5K6.
The Spiny dogfish is the most abundant shark in B.C. waters with biomass estimated to be approxitnateiy 200,000t.
Freauenting ^i depths within coastal shelf and slope habitats, the dogfish is a significant predator within NE Pacific
ecosystems impacting a wide variety of vertebrate and invertebrate taxonomic groups spanning serveral trophic
levels In this paper we summarize the feeding habits of the spiny dogfish in B.C. waters analyzing several data sets
collected during the 197O's and 198O's. and comparing them to published literature. In particular, we examine the
spatial and temporal variability in dogfish feeding habits and discuss the importance of recognizing bias when
attempting to estimate consumption rates of dogfish prey.




   230                          11:30 Sunday                                  17.                              ovc
Captive feeding biology of elasmobranchs. H.F. Mollet, Monterey Bay Aquarium, 886 Cannery Row, Monterey,
CA 93940, USA.
We observed large food consumption of 7.1 (s.e. 0.7, n = 17) percent body-mass per day for a captive juvenile
pelagic stingray Dasyatis violacea (disc width 44.4 cm, PIT tag # AVID 017-085-067), in a holding pool kept at 20
»C. This confirmed earlier results in the 4600 m’Outer Bay Water Exhibit of the Monterey Bay Aquanurn when 3
iuvenile pelagic stingrays were displayed for three months. It suggests possible large differences in food
consumption and con’esponding grow^ rates between captive and wild pelagic stingrays. Food consuniption and
growth rates of juvenile elasmobranchs in captivity are compared with those in the wild. The dieta^ requiremerns ot
captive temperate wafer sharks in a semi-open sea water system and pelagic stingrays in a nearly closed system
are compared with results for elasmobranchs In other aquaria.




 Measuring food consumption in elasmobranch fishes has proven to be a challenge, arid has resulted in the use of a
 variety of methods. In recent years, bioenergetics models have increased in populanty and cornpleaty. These
 models take into account energetic costs of living (metabolism, wastes, and growth) in order to estimate
 consumption requirements. Bioenergetics models have been used to estimate consurnption rates for a numter rn
 different species including lemon, sandbar, greyreef, galapagos, tiger, bull, spiny dogfish, scalloperl hamineihead
 sharks, and spiny butterfly ray. Like all models, output is reliant on the quality of input data, thus dyed
 measurements of the costs of living and how costs vary with environmenta variables and body size are needed. A
 complete model has been assembled for the lemon shark, which through laboratory and field rese^h has showri
 good cross-validation. However, accuracy of some models may be questioriable due to inclusioii ^^ta horn oUier
 species or by using laboratory data alone. Recent advances in telemet^ry techniques and captive husb^diy may
 offer new opportunities for estimating energetic parameters in both the field and laboratory. Bioenergetira models
 may also be useful in quantifying the ecological association of elasmobranchs on habitats and prey populations.




                                                                              attd
 Mu                     , *Centro de Bki^ogb             , Facutdede de Ciincias, Onivertidade de Ltsboa, P 1700
 Lisboa, Portugal.;         Nacional de Ciencias Natur^., Josd Gufidtrez Ab^al 2. 28006 Madrid, Spain.; J.
 Bosch, Dept, of Zoology. University of Texas, Austin TX 78712. USA.
 Midwife toads are a primitive group of anurans with parental care and highly simplified vocal communication.
 Several populations of Alytes have been studied in continental Spain since1987. The distributions of call
 characteristics overlapped between different population and species. The covariance between temperature and call
 duration varied between populations of different taxonomic groups. Large male reproductive advantage was found.
 Phonotaxis tests showed that calls with lower frequencies (emitted by larger males) were more attractive to females
 than calls with high frequencies. In syntopic populations of the two species there was no sign of character
 displacement in the male calls, but female preference was different than in allopatric situations. Males increase their
 calling ratewhen exposed to a nearby competitor. The response is different accordingto competitor's size and

Much of the communication behavior of anuran amphibians and other vertebrates takes place in the context of
reproduction. Many aspects of communication are dependent on, influen^d by, hormones associated with
reproductive state. Less clearly appreciated is the fact that communication signals influence hormonal state in a
variety of vertebrates. Communication and endocrine state should therefore be considered rnutu^ly tpteraOTng
systems. We have used anuran amphibians as a model for investigating this interaction. Our results indicate that the
frog auditory system (carrying information about vocal communication signals) connects with several areas of the
basal forebrain. Some of these areas contain gonadotropin releasing hormone cells while others contain populations
of catecholamine neurons. The latter populations are sensitive to circulating sex steroid honnones, and may be
involved in some aspect of reproductive endocrinology or behavior. The strong connections between auditory and
endocrine systems in frogs suggest that the reception of communication signals may influence gonads state,
^periments exposing frogs to conspecific calls support this. Males exposecf to conspecific calls showed larger
testes and changes in testes histology compared to control animals. In frogs, therefore, vocal communication signals
trigger changes in reproductive physiology as well as reproductive behavior.




   233__________                 08:45 Sunday                           .   .    14                                TWr
The use of interactive playback and call monitoring to study acoustical interactions in frogs.              J.d. Schwartz,
Division of Biological Sciences, Tucker Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo. 65211 USA.
 Male anurans of many species advertise for mates vocally in dense aggregations where they may also interact
aggressively with competitors. Recently, sophisticated experimental techniques Iwe been used to address
questions about the proximate and ultimate bases of vocal behavior of these animals. For example, with iriteraofive
playback an an^og or computer-based call synthesizer Is made to respond to a calling male after user-spectned time
delays. I will discuss how 1 have used this methodology in work on call timing and aggressive behavior. Our
understanding of the calling dynamics of choras members has also benefited from the use of rnulti-charyiel
equipment to monitor the vocal behavior of two or more males. By using such a system in my studies of Hyra
mcroceiiiala in Panama, I have found that males respond primarily to their nearest neighbors in the chonjs. These
results agree with recent findings on acoustically signaling insects. The behavior of rnales minirnizes signal overly
with individuals whose calls are most likely to seriously impair their ability to attract a female. I will also discuss data
on vocal interactions among male H. versicolor obtained in an artificial pond where my colleagues and I have
manipulated chorus density.



                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                               i



Xenopus laevis is a nocturnal Pipid whose native habitat is the murky ponds of South Africa. Two vocal behaviore
had been characterized: the advertisement call of sexually receptive males and the release call (ticking) of sexu^ly
unreoeptive females. We have recently described an additional vocal signal, a fertility advertisement called
rapping, given by females just prior to oviposition. Rapping is an acoustic aphrodisiac that stimulates m^e calling
and phonotaxis. Field and laboratory obsenzations suggest that calling is confined to only one or two rnaes at any
one time, even in densely populated ponds. We have recorded several male/male vocalizations (e.g. chirping and
growling) that might serve to establish amale vocal hierarchies at the onset of the breeding season. I mil discuss
the significance of these calls in reproductive interactions and the cellular and molecular mechanisms that contnbute
to the sexually differentiated vocal repertoire.




 nwaiicaoi* eif nw eermt «|!rine it) wjkm Btfwopian pcqMifetliem e( Bast Wean snmN bttrb (Avtos
 oaftjdlftiosus}: poralM mierocvoluiionary dwrm or apectation? A.S. Gohibteov and E.Y. Krysanov, Severtsov
 Institute of Ecof^ and Evokriion, Moscow 117071, Russia; P. BererKlzen and W.W. Oimmick, Museum of Natural
 History, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 66045, U.SJK.
 Barbus paludinosus, a diploid, small African barb species is widely distributed from South Africa to the Hom of
 Africa. It was previously reported from the Ethiopian Rift Valley and the closely related species, B. humilis, was
 reported from Lake Tana. We found B. paludinosus in the upper reaches of the White Nile, Blue Nile, and Omo River
 drainages. This species normally has a strong serrated spine in the dorsal fin. At two localities in the upper reaches
 of the White Nile and Omo tributaries, populations are characterized by a greatly reduced dorsal spine. In the same
 drainages, barbs with the nonnal dorsal spine morphology occur about 20 ton downstream. The borderline betweeen
 forms with normal and reduced dorsal spine morphology apparently coincides with the upper limit of distribution of
 the hexapioid large barb species, the only potential predator in the naturally   235                          10:45 Sunday                                  .14                              .   THN
Communication and matbig in the midwife toads (A/ytes obstelrlcans and Alytes cistemasll). Ten years of
studies. R. Mdrouez**. "Centro de Biologia Amblental, Faculdade de Cldncias, Universidade de Usboa, P 1700
Lisboa, Portugal.; “’Museo Naclonal de Ciencias Naturales., Jose Gutidn'ez Abascal 2. 28006 Madrid, Spain.; J.
Bosch, Dept, of Zoology. University of Toxas, Austin TX 78712. USA.
Midwife toads are a primitive group of anurans with parental care and highly simplified vocal communication.
Several populations of Alytes have been studied in continental Spain since1987. The distributions of call
characteristics overlapped between different population and species. The covariance between temperature and call
duration varied between populations of different taxonomic groups. Large male reproductive advantage was found.
Phonotaxis tests showed that calls with lower frequencies (emitted by larger males) were more attractive to females
than calls with high frequencies, tn syntopic populations of the two species there was no sign of character
displacement in the male calls, but female preference was different than in allopatric situations. Males increase their
calling ratewhen exposed to a nearby competitor. The response is different accordingto competitor's size and
competitor's calling rate. Call alternation between males is non-random. Although call overlap affects negatively
female preference, call alternation does not decrease call overlap. Many of the differences observed in acoustic^
competition can be related with thedifferences In mating season length between species, and with thedifferences in
selective pressures that these two scenarios incorporate (male acoustical competition, and female choice based in
both dynamic and static call characteristics).




   236                          11:30 Sunday                                    14                                 THN
Evolutionary aspects of mating call variation In the diplold-tefraploid complex of Bufo virldls. C. Giacoma
and S. Castellano, Oipartimento di Biologia Animate, Universita di Torino, Via accademia Albertina, 17, 10123
Torino. Italy.
The asian green toads have been profitably employed as a model for the study of the evolution of vocalizations by
comparing diploid, triploid and tetrjqiloid green toads on the basis of morphometrical and acoustical parameters.
Since in green toads advertisement calls produced by males play an important role in mate choice, particular
attention is given to their differences. Diplcrid toads show signficantly larger body size and proportionally larger head
and shorter limbs than both tetrapioids and triploids, whereas no evident morphometrical differences were observed
between triploids and tetrapioids. Diploid advertisement calls have spectral and temporal properties that signiticantly
differ from those of both triploid and tetrapioid advertisement calls. Diploids produce significantly longer calls with
higher pulse-rates and lower frequencies than those of tetrapioids. Although strong associations are found between
some temporal and spectral call parameters and body size of the calling male, our analyses demonstrate that the
observed differences in advertisement calls cannot be explained as the by-product of body size differentiation only.
We address the question of the factors that could be responsible for these differences: whether they are a direct
consequence of poliploidy or, whether they should be seen as the result of an evolutionary process of diversification.




  .■237 .                    . 08:00 Sunday                                  CF5                       .   .       CHM
Testing morphometric theories on phylogenetic and environmental hypotheses: examples from characid and
atherinopsid fishes. B. Chemoff. Department of Zoology Field Museum Roosevelt Rd. at Lakeshore Drive
Chicago, IL 60605 USA.
The diversity of sizes and shapes within and among groups of fishes is one of the principal features of their
evolutionary history. To understand as much as possible about the history of size and shape evolution, two
important components must be explored: phylogeny and environment. The evolution of size and shape have often
been discussed in the context of development^ theories involving differential growth (allometry), differential timing
(heterochrony), developmental integration, etc. The purpose of this presentation will be to examine ways in which
developmental theories of size and shape diversity are tested on phylogenetic and environmental hypotheses. The
data comprise ontogenetic series of landmarks from clades of characid (Bryconops) and atherinopsid {Atherinella}
fishes, fit to a reference form, from which the relative waqis and relative-warp scores are calculated. Phylogenetic
and environmental components of fomi change among species within clades is analyzed from both partial least
squares confirmatory factor analyses. The results show that in contrast to expectations derived from the literature,
large amounts of the variance in form-change among species are explained by phylogenetic hypotheses of species
relationships.

   238                         08:15 Sunday                                  CF5                            ,   CHM
Reduction of the dorsal spine in some Ethiopian populations of East African small barb {Barbus
paludinosusy. parallel microevolutionary changes or speciation? A.S. Golubtsov and E.Y. Krysanov, Severtsev
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Moscow 117071, Russia; P. Berendzen and W.W. Dimmick, Museum of Natural
History, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 66045, U.SJ\.
Barbus paludinosus, a diploid, small African barb species is widely distributed from South Africa to the Hom of
Africa. It was previously reported from the Ethiopian Rift Valley and the closely related species, B. humilis, was
reported from Lake Tana. We found B. paludinosus in the upper reaches of the White Nile, Blue Nile, and Omo River
drainages. This species normally has a strong serrated spine in the dorsal fin. At two localities in the upper reaches
of the White Nile and Omo tributaries, populations are characterized by a greatly reduced dorsal spine. In the same
drainages, barbs with the normal dorsal spine morphology occur about 20 Iot downstream. The borderline betweeen
forms with normal and reduced dorsal spine morphology apparently coincides with the upper limit of distribution of
the hexapioid large barb species, the only potential predator in the naturally depauperated fish communities
inhabiting the upper reaches of the both nver drainages. The distance between locations where the form with
reduced dorsal spine occurs Is more than 200 km. These locations are separated by ths drainage system of a large
tributary of the Blue Nile, where only the normal form was found. The morphological description of the Ethiopian
populations of B. paludinosus with and without dorsal spine is presented. In order to test hypothesis about
independent reduction of ths dorsal spins in barbs from ths two distant locations ths karyological and mtDNA
comparisons wsrs mads.




   239                          08:30 Sunday                                  CF5                               CHM
Morphological differentiation between populations of the frecklebelly madtom, Noturus munitus (Teteostei:
Ictaluridae). D.A. Neely. P.M. Harris and R.L. Mayden, Biodiversity and Systematics, Box 870345, The University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345 USA.
The upper Coosa River basin poses a particularly perplexing biogeographic problem; it harbors isolated populations
of many species of fishes otherwise found below the Fall Line. Over 17 species exhibit this distributional pattern to
some degree. The already recognized high degree of endemism in the drainage {Pemina antesella, P. Jenkinsi,
Etheostoma etowahae, E. scotd, etc.) suggests the possibility of cryptic species in other, more 'Iwidespread' taxa.
We examined morphometric and meristic variation across the range of the frecklebelly madtom, Noturus munitus.
The populations in ths Etowah and Conasauga Rivers possess a unique suite of morphological characters, including
differences in shape and pigmentation, when compared with populations from the Peart, Cahaba, and Tombigbee
Rivers. We are in the process of analyzing genetic variation within this species and other closely related members of
Rabida to identify phylogenetic relationships within this complex. Conservation and biogeographic implications will
be discussed.




   240                          08:45 Sunday                                 CFS         .        .   .    ,    CHM
Did vicariance mold phenotypes of cyprinid fishes In western North America? Evidence from the Gila River
basin of Arizona. M.E. Douglas and W.L. Minckley, Department of Biology and Museum, Arizona State University,
Tempe AZ 85287-1501 USA; B.D. DeMarais, Oklahoma Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Norman OK
73019 USA.
Patterns of morphological variation in a group of western North American cyprinid fishes (the 'Gila robustd complex
of the Gila River basin of Arizona and New Mexico) has long puzzled fish taxonomists. Three different forms, (G.
robusta, G. intermedia, and G. nigra) are recognized, yet their basin-wide distributions are a disjunct mosaic. Several
hypotheses have been offered to accommodate this aberrant pattern: ecotypy/ecophenotypy (i.e., individual or
populational response to local conditions), hybridization/intergradation (i.e., gene flow between differentiated species
or races); and vicariance (an historical explanation related to regional hydrographic evolution). To represent these
hypotheses, 33 sample locations were scored within the basin with regard to stream size, stream elevation, stream
barriers, and paleodrainage pattern (the latter accomplished by supenmposing sites onto maps depicting drainage
patterns during six different geologic epochs). Moqihometric data, collected from 25 individuals at all 33 sites, were
then contrasted against the 9 test matrices using two- and three-way Mantel tests. A vicariance model was the only
hypothesis proficient in explaining extant diversity of fish phenotypes. Of those reconstructions used in this model,
only the Pliocene epoch was significantly associated with extant distributions of phenotypes.       241                        09:00 Sunday                                  CF5                               CHM
    Coevolutlonary hypotheses and evolution of mate discrimination in a gynogenetic species complex of
    Amazon mollies. L.A. Dries. Dept, of Zoology. University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA.

    Gynogenetic female Amazon mollies (Poedlia formosa) mate with sexual males (P. latipinna} for success^
    reproduction Studies show that of males distinguish between conspecific females and gynogens, and preferentially
    mate with the former. However, the existence of gynogens indicates mate discrimination is imperfect. The Red
    Queen Hypothesis has been applied to this system suggesting the evolution of mate recognition in is a
    coevolutionary "arms race'; the lack of genetic contribution by males to gynogenetic offspring imposes selection for
    male discrimination that favors sexual females. This, in turn, imposes selection on gynogens to evolve characters
    that override male discrimination. This assumes gynogenetic females have evolved since their origination. Amazons
    originated with a hybridization between P. mexicana and P. latipinna at least several thousand years ago. If a
    coevolutionary hypothesis is true, extant gynogens should differ from ancestral gynogens. In ^s study first
    generation sexual hybrids were used as an analog for the ancestral gynogens to test this hypothesis. The predictions
    are gynogens will have an enhanced ability to attract sexual males, males will prefer gynogens over hybnds, and
    females will differ in agonistic behavior. The results of this study do not support these predictions. This suggests
    application of such hypotheses to gynogenetic systems be preceded by studies documenting the presence of
    evolutionary change in the species of interest.




       242        ..               09:15 Sunday                       .     .    CF5             . ..             CHM
    Evolutionary relationships of the species of the genus Paralabrax (Serranidae, Perciformes) based on
    morphological and molecular data. G.A. Herrera. Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Section of
    Vertebrates (Ichthyology), 900 Exposition Blvd., Los Angeles. CA 90007 USA.
    The sandbasses of the genus Paralabrax are New World fishes from the Eastern Pacific and Western Atlantic.
    Because the sister group relationships of the Serranin genera related to Paralabrax were unknown, they were
    resolved first. Osteological characters of the cranium and pelvic girdle support the monophyly of Cratrnus-Paralabrax-
    Centropristls. The nine species of Paralabrax share derived features of urohyal configuration, pterygiophore stmeture
    in dorsal and anal fins, and Stnicture of lateral line scales. A dadistio analysis based on morphological and molecular
    (cytochrome b gene) data suggests an early separation of two groups. One is predominantly South Amencan and
    includes 5 species: dewegeri from the Atlantic (Venezuela-Brazil), humeralis (Chile-Peru), callaensts (Ecuador), and
    albomaculatus (Galapagos). Interestingly, the species clathratus belongs to this group but is found in the
    Northeastern Pacific. The other group is composed of 4 Northern hemisphere species: loro (Central Amenra-Baja
    California), auroguttatus, maculatofasdatus and nebulifer (which are predominantly found from Baja to Central
    California). A hypothesis of relationships is presented. The species of Paralabrax seeni to have evdved recently, in
    the last 4-10 million years, in contrast with the species of Centropristis, which appear to be significantly older.




       243                         09:30 Sunday       .    .                    ...CFS                  . .        CH^
\   Comparative biogeography of two species of poeclliid fishes from Mexico. K.-c. Chen and R.L. Borowsky,
    Department of Biology, New York University. Washington Square, NY 10003, USA.
    Patterns of geographical variation in AP-PCR (RAPD) markers were compared between two species of P^ciliid
    fishes. Thirty-one populations of the variable platyfish Xiphophonjs variatus and thirteen population of the killi^h
    Heterandria ionesi vrara studied. These species overlap in range in central-eastern Mexico, in freshwaters frorn^e
    Rio Tamesi drainage, south to the Rio Nautia. Six primers revealed 266 scoreable bands in X variatus and 189 m
    H. ionesi (163 and 124 informative characters, respectively). Parsimony analysis of the data was perfoirod in X.
    variatus by heuristic search for the shortest cladograms. The data for H. Jonesi are still being gathered,_ and a subset
    of only eight populations was analysed (exhaustive search). The results support three geographically disjunct clMes
    in each spedesi a northern clade centered in the Tamesi arainage, a south-eastern clade In the lowlands of the
    Cazones, Tecolutla, Solteros and Nautia, and a south-western clade, more upstream in these nvers. We
    hypothesize that the same geographical barriers have affected the variation In both species. Relevant geographic
    barriers are not obvious, however. We suggest that the south-eastern and south-western populations are divided by
    elevation, while the northern populations are separated from the southern populations by unsuitable habitat of slow-
    flowina waters. Il Is also worth noting that populations of X evetynae are nested entirely within the geographic range
    of the south-west clade and are indistinguishable from them. This raises the question of whether it is a valid species
    or whether all of the fish in the south-west clade might really be X. evelynae, rather than X. variatus.




                                     10:45. Sunday                                CRI                              .CHM
     Inter-populatton comparison of multiple paternity in the Trinidadian guppy.            C.D. Kelly and J.-G.J. Godin,
     Department of Biology, Mount Allison University, Sacl^lle, NB, E4L1G7.

    Multiple-male mating by females and the resulting sperm competition are widespread in animals. Benefits aocreed
    by males that inseminate many females include increased reproductive success. However, the reasons underlying
    multiple mating by females are ambiguous since a single insemination can fertilize all her ova and mating involves
    potential costs to both sexes. One such cost is an increased risk of predation. Recent studies have shown that
    animals can assess the local risk of predation and, in response to high risk, females may decrease their mate
    choosiness and males may increase their use of alternative mating tactejs. If predation risk increases the relative
    frequency of sneaky copulations in males and reduces choosiness in females, then we predict a higher frequency of
    conounenf multiple paternity per brood in females originating from high-predation populations as compared to
    females from low-predation populations. To test this hypothesis, genetic data from a polymoqjhio microsatellite locus
    was employed to conservatively estimate multiple paternity in eight populations of &ie Trinidadian guppy (Poedlia
    reticulata) differing in fish predation regime. Our data suggest that, on average, the frequency of concurrent multiple
    paternity is three times greater in high-predation populations than in low-predation populations. These results further
    suggest that predation risk reduces the variance in male mating success and thus the opportunity for sexual

  244                          09:45 Sunday              .                  CFS                              CHM
Diversity and distribution of the genus "Garra"           (PlsceszCyprInidae) in Africa.      A. Getahun**’, ’Dert.of
Ichthyology.American Museum of Natural History Central park west at 79th St.,New York, NY,10024 USA; “City
College of the City University of New York USA.
The study aims at resolving the taxonomic jumble among the African species of the genus "Garra" and establish their
present geographic distribution. Extensive field collections have been made from Ethiopian freshwater bodies
where the diversity of the genus is believed to be relatively high. Available museum specimens have been
investigated. Morphology and morphometries have been used to identify the species. According to prelimina^
results, twelve forms (species?) are recognized from Ethiopia, five of which are new. Four of the "forms" are found in
six other African countries while the remaining eight are known only from Ethiopia. ‘G.dembeensis' is the most
abundant and widely distributed species found in 75% of the drainage basins of Ethiopia and in six other African
countries. Seven other species of the genus are known to occur in ten other African countries. Generally, the genus
has so far been reported from fifteen African countries. The range is from Ethiopia in the east to Guinea iri the west
and from Chad in the north to Tanzania in the south. The historical biogeography of the genus is controversial




   245                         10:15 Sunday                       .   .    . CF4                  . . .       CHM
Female preference for trait symmetry in addition to trait size in swordtail fish. M.R. Morris, Department of
Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens OH 45701 USA.
Interest in fluctuating asymmetries, random deviations from perfect bilateral symmetry, has spread to studies of
sexual selection because of the intriguing idea that females could use the degree of asymmetry of a male trait to
assess the genetic quality of potential mates. The evidence that females prefer males with symmetrical sexual
signals, however, has remained controversial. A problem that applies to most previous studies is that preference for
trait size can be misinterpreted as preference for symmetry, even when overall trait size is held constant, if females
assess trait size by the largest minimum on one side. If overall trait size is equal between males, the asymmetrical
males will have the maximum and minimum trait size, and so preference to mate with symmetrical males could
actually reflect a preference to avoid males with the minimum trait on one side. Xiphophorus cortezi females
preferred males with symmetrica! bar numbers when the minimum number of bars was held constant. The strength
of female preference for the symmetrical males with fewer bars was negatively correlated with the strength of
preference the same females had for bar number. These results clearly demonstrate that females preferred trait
symmetry in addition to trait size.




   246^                         10:30 Sunday                     ..   ..     CF4                     .        CHM
Female zebrafish (Danlo rerio} prefer larger males. M. Pvren. Penn Stale Erie, Station Road, Erie, PA 16563
USA.
1 tested for female preferences of male body size in zebrafish {Danio rerio). My experimental design allowed females
to view a small and a large male in adjacent aquaria. Time that females spent near males was scored from 20 min
replays of videos. The average standard length (SL) of large males was 28 mm and small males were 22 m. The
average difference between small and large male SL in individual experiments was 6.4 rnm. Females spent
significantly more time near large males (average = 647 s) than small males (average = 550 s; ind. t-test, P < 0.02).
When female time near males was scored only if the males were adjacent to the female, females also spent
significantly more time near large males (178 s) than near small males (117 s; ind. t-lest, P < 0.05). My current
experiments are to test for female preference of male yellow coloration by filtering out yellow light from expenmental
males, and to use DNA fingerprinting to identify paternity in competitive matings.




    250                         t*-.SO Sunday                .              CF4                               CHM'
The role of choice and performance in determining the diets of Juvenile sculpins. A.E. Cook. Department of
 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of, California, Irvine; Irvine, CA 92717 USA.
Diet studies often measure selectivity, or the proportion of diet made up by specific prey types compared to their
occurrence in the environment. This measure is the result of two events: the choice to attack that prey type and
whether the attack results in a successful capture. This study quantified these two events separately in the juveniles
of three species of sculpin (Cottidae) to compare their roles in detemriining the taxonomic coposifion of the diet.
Choice showed a greater influence on the occurence of harpacticoid copepods and gammarid amphipods in the diet
than performance. Significant interspecific differences in choice of harpacticoids and gammarids were found to be
correlated with differences in the occurrence of these prey types in the diets of the three species. Performance
played a greater role in detemiining the occurrence of calanoid copepods in the diet than did choice. Species and
individuals with high capture success on calanoids did not choose to attack this prey type more often than those with
lower capture success. This study indicates that classic measures of selectivity will only reflect active choice or
avoidance when capture success on a prey type is high.H. Jonesi (163 and 124 informative characters, respectively). Parsimony analysis of the data was performed in X.
varialus by heuristic search for the shortest cladograms. The data for H. Jonesi are still being gathered, and a subset
of only eight populations was analysed (exhaustive search). The results support three geographically disjunct clades
in each species: a northern clade centered in the Tamesi drainage, a south-eastern clade in the Imviands of the Rios
Cazones, Tecolutla, Solteros and Nautla, and a south-western clade, more upstream in these rivers. We
hypothesize that the same geographical barriers have affected the variation in both species. Relevant geographic
bam'ers are not obvious, however. We suggest that the south-eastern and south-western populations are divided by
elevation, while the northern populations are separated from the southern populations by unsuitable habitat of slow-
flowing waters. It is also worth noting that populations of X evelynae are nested entirely within the geographic range
of the south-west clade and are indistinguishable from them. This raises the question of whether it is a valid species
or whether all of the fish In the south-west clade might really be X. evelynae, rather than X. variatus.




    247                          10 45 Sunday                                 CF4                               CHM
Inter-population comparison of multipls paternity In the Trinidadian guppy.              C.D. Kelly and J.-G.J. Godin,
Department of Biology, Mount Allison University, Sackville, NB, E4L 1G7.

Multiple-male mating by females and the resulting sperm competition are widespread in animals. Benefits accrued
by rriales that inseminate many females include increased reproductive success. However, the reasons underlying
multiple mating by females are ambiguous since a single insemination can fertilize all her ova and mating involves
potential costs to both sexes. One such cost is an increased risk of predation. Recent studies have shown that
animals can assess the local risk of predation and, in response to nigh risk, females may decrease their mate
choosiness and males may increase their use of alternative mating tactics. If predation risk increases the relative
frequency of sneaky copulations in males and reduces choosiness in females, then we predict a higher frequency of
concurrent multiple paternity per brood in females originating from high-predation populations as comparer] to
females from low-predation populations. To test this hypothesis, genetic data from a polymorphic microsatellite locus
was employed to conservatively estimate multiple paternity in eight populations of ths Trinidadian guppy (Poedlia
reticulata) differing in fish predation regime. Our data suggest that, on average, ths frequency of concurrent multiple
paternity is three times greater in high-predation populations than in li}w-predation populations. These results further
suggest that predation risk reduces the variance in male mating success and thus the opportuniV for sexual
selection within populations.




   248 .                        11:00 Sunday                                  CF4                               CHM
Nest defense by the exotic fish, round goby (Neogoblus melanostomus), on a shipwreck In western Lake
Erie. L.P. Corkum and R.G. Wickett, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON N9B


Our obsenrations of round goby nesting behaviour on shipwrecks in the western basin of Lake Erie using a video
camera indicate that these fish spawn at much greater depths (7 m) than previously reported (< 2m). Of the species
that approached ths exposed nest (rock bass, smallmouth bass, yellow perch, logperch, round gobies), most
behavioural interactions occurred between the guarding male and other round gobies. During 12 minutes of
observation, there were 63 Instances in which round gobies approached the nest and In 4 cases, intruders fed on
eggs. In response, the guarding male approached (34 times), chased (18 times) and hit (4 times) round goby
intnjders. The response by the resident goby to the presence of rock bass (1 swam by and 7 approached) resulted in
6 approaches, 4 chases and 1 hit The resident male responded to juvenile smallmouth bass (3 swam by and 1
approached) only once by approaching the intnjder. The guarding male did not respond to either logperch or yellow
perch. We anticipate that recruitment of round gobies will increase substantially in Lake Erie owing to the presence
of artificial reefs (shipwrecks) and the ability of guarding males to defend nests effectively.




   249     .                    :11:15 Sunday                                 CF4                               CHM
Context dependent alarm behavior in the estaurine fish Fundulus heteroclitus. K.K. Parker. Duke University
Marine Laboratory, 135 Duke Marine Lab rd., Beaufort, NC 28516 USA.
Fundulus heteroclitus five in tidal creeks where predation risk varies with the structure of the microhabitat and time of
year. Structure of the microhabitat varies as a function of the tides. Accurate recognition and response to predators
is essential to the sunrival of prey. This study investigated alarm behavior of adult and juvenile estuarine fish, F.
heteroclitus. Activity was determined in response to conspecific alarm chemical in relatively deep and shallow water
(aquaria and fingerbowls). In deep water, in the fall, F. heteroclitus show container dependen alarm behavior. Both
adult and juvenile fish showed a significant decrease in activity in response to alarm chemical compared addition of
control. However, in shallow fingereowls neither adults or juveniles show a decrease In activity. Adults also show
seasonal context dependent alarm behavior. In winter adults in aquaria show no change in activity in response to
alarm chemicals. Accurate responses to alarm chemicals may be those that are modulated by context, such as
water depth, that reflects the actual risk of predation. Field experiments will determine if these results extend to the

significantly more time near large males (average = 647 s) than small males (average = 550 s; ind. t-test, P < 0.02).
When female time near males was scored only if the males were adjacent to the female, females also spent
significantly more time near large males (178 s) than near small males (117 s; ind. t-test, P < 0.05). My current
experiments are to test for female preference of male yellow coloration by filtering out yellow light from experimental
males, and to use DNA fingerprinting to identify paternity in competitive matings.




   250                          11 :-3Q Sunday                              CF4                               CHM
The role of choice and performance In determining the diets of Juvenile sculpins. A.E. Cook. Department of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of, California, Irvine; Irvine, CA 92717 USA.

Diet studies often measure selectivity, or the proportion of diet made up by specific prey types compared to their
occurrence in the environment. This measure is the result of two events: the choice to attack that prey type and
whether the attack results in a successful capture. This study quantified these two events separately in the juveniles
of three species of sculpin (Cottidae) to compare their roles in determining the taxonomic coposition of the diet.
Choice showed a greater influence on the oocurenoe of harpaoticoid copepods and gammarid amphipods in the diet
than performance. Significant interspecific differences in choice of harpacticoids and gammarids were found to be
correlated with differences in the occurrence of these prey types in the diets of the three species. Performance
played a greater role In detennlnlng the occurrence of calanoid copepods in the diet than did choice. Species and
individuals with high capture success on calanoids did not choose to attack this prey type more often than those with
lower capture success. This study indicates that classic measures of selectivity will only reflect active choice or
avoidance when capture success on a prey type is high.




   251    .                    11:45 Sunday                             .. CF4                                CHM
Burrow distribution and diel behavior of Pholidichthys feucotaen/a (family Pholidichthyldae) on coral reefs,
Solomon Islands. E. Clark. University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742; S. Kogge, 10600 Stoneyhill Ct.,
Silver Spring, MD 20901; T. Album, 1488 Klines Run Rd., Wrightsville, PA 17368.
  Diel behavior was studied on pairs of adults living In burrows and juveniles sharing these burrows. Juveniles retire
into burrows at dusk an emerge at dawn to break into large swarms, feeding on plankton as far as 10 m from their
home burrow at depths 4 to 34 m. Adults clean their burrows by spitting out sand and carrying out rubble. At night
neither adults nor juveniles emerge from their burrows. Burrow entrances were obsenred continuously for periods of
2 to 35 hours with low light and regular video cameras. Disturbances to their burrow entrances by other fish and a
large octopus caused only a temporary break in their cleaning activity. Heads of adults emerged the most (1/3 of
total length) and stayed out longest (1/2 min) when they were not cleaning out their burrows but appeared to look
around or lunge at other fishes. They may cannibalize their young as food. The swimming and feeding behavior of
juvenile P. leucotaenia (sometimes called ■mimic catfish") do not resemble that of the venonous catfish, Plotosus
lineatus. Sixteen reefs were surveyed at Guadalcanal, and the Honda, Russell, and New Georgia islands. P.
leucotaenia were found in all except the isolated St. Marys Island.




    252                         08:00 Sunday                                GS1                               MCN
Blennies on offshore petroleum platforms: similarity of sissemblage structure among platforms and the
effect of a hurricane. T.J. Rauch. Dept, of Biological Sciences, The University of Southern Mississippi, Box 5018
Hattiesburg, MS 30406-5018 USA.
Marine fish assemblages may be viewed as being structured by deterministic or chaotic processes. To understand
factors important in structuring an assemblage of four blenniid species (Family: Blenniidae) I collected data on their
abundance and distribution in early July 1997 on six offshore petroleum platforms. Hurricane Danny passed through
the study area 50 km offshore of the Louisiana coast in mid July. Between late August and mid-September I
collected data on nine platforms in the same area. I conducted visual censuses on diagonal cross-members of the
platforms at depths of 1,5, 10, and 15 m. Blennies displayed a distinct vertical zonation with Scartella cristate
confined to the upper 2 m and Parablennius marmoreus limited to 10-15 m depths. I used Morisita's index (Im) to
investigate blenniid assemblage similarity among platforms and the effect of the hurricane. Im values were compared
to a null model of randomly generated data. Platforms were similar in assemblage structure with three of the four
depths sampled having average Im's > 1. Pre- and post-hurricane Im's averaged greater than one in three of the four
depths sampled, indicating that this disturbance did not affect these blenniid assemblages.  253          ____________ 08:15 Sunday                            -   .    GS1                               :MCN
FAD-assocIated fishes: factors affecting aggregation size and composition.                P.A. Nelson. Department of
Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5640.
I studied near-shore, juvenile reef fishes associated with floating objects along the Pacific coast of Panarna. Using
naturally-occuring flotsam and Fish Aggregation Devices (FADs), I inade observations and conducted expenments
on factors affecting group size and species composition. Increased FAD size and the presence of fouling biota
positively affected aggregation sizes and the number of fish species present. FADs hung with model fish, lead
weights and unmanipulated control FADs did not differ significantly in aggregation size or composrtion H^ever
drifting FADs deployed with live fish {Abudefduf troscheli!) appeared to recruit.addition^ fisti more
deployed without fish. The species composition of aggregations associated with dnfting flotsam' dfl^ecI frorn
aqqregations found with anchored flotsam and anchored FADs. At an array of anchor^ FADs, species composition
was predictable over days to weeks, but showed distinct changes over a penod of months.




                                08:30 Sunday                                 GS1                          MCN
   254
Pikes and muskies: mudminnows gone bad?                J.A. Ldpez. University of Washington Fish Collection, BOX
355100, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
The phylogenetic intra-relationships of esocoid fishes have been examined repeatedly in systernatio
contradictory results. The pre-Tertiary origin of the group and low Recent diversity likely contnbute to the apparent
paucity of apomorphic characters that deMie esocoid clades. Cuirently, the Esoooidei contams too                  ‘jj®
Esocidae and Umbridae, with Esox coextensive with Esocidae, and Dallia, Novurnb^, and Umbra corrjn^ng the
Umbridae. Generally, the following inter-generic relationships are accepted: {Esox {Novumbra (Dallia, Umbra))), but
the literature abounds with conflicting evidence.
Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequence data from the 16S rRNA and cytochrome b mitrxhondrial gei^s slror^
support a previously overlooked hypothesis of esocoid relationships. Parsimony and m^imum likehhood
show a paraphylefic Umbridae in the following set of esocoid relationships; (Umbra (Dallia
Published studies of esocoid karyotypes, allozymes, and fossils offer supporting evidence for the DNA-denyed
hypothesis. A survey of published data on esocoid anatomy may reveal previously unrecognized morphological
synapomoiphies to diagnose the newly postulated clades.




                                 08:45 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
   255
 The phylogenetic systematics of the Goodeidae (Cyprinodontiformes). S,A,Webb, Division of Fishes - UMMZ,
 University of Michigan. 1109 Geddes Ave,, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
 Goodeine fishes are remarkable for the degree to which they provision developing embryos A suite of physiological
 and morphological traits permits internal fertilization, pronounced matratrophy, andI Iwe birth in misiro^I group
 from Bie central plateau of Mexico. Morphological and nucleic acid ^quence (COI) data forrn the bas s of a
 phylogenetic analysis of goodeid interrelationships. Forty-one species from 18 genera compnse thei ingroup, and
 meters of the Cyprinodontidae, Fundulidae, Poedliidae, Proteridulidae, and Ox^onecfiM are lAilized as
 outgroups to polarize character states. Monophyly of the Goodeidae, and the sister-group
 Goodeinae and Empetrichfhyinae, is supported. The Prolundulidae is supported as th® s ®J®^9™®P
 Goodeidae. Earty diversification events within the Goodeinae are not well supported, potential^ indicating rapid
 radiation of the major lineages. The evolution and biogeography of the Goodeidae will be discussed.




  A praHnrirwry phytogeneflc ane^ait of the aubfamlly Amphiprioninaa (PercHormes: Pomacentridae). KL.
  Tsog, Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-24^ USA.

  The Amphiprioninae is a subfamily of marine fishes, commonly called anemonefishes, composed of two genera
  (Amphiprion and Premnas) with approximately 28 species. The phylogenetic relationships within this subfamily are
  poorty understood. Although a hypothetical set of relationships has been previously proposed, the phylogeny of the
  group has never been fully examined. Previous work has suggested that the members of this subfamily are divided
  among six species complexes. At least one representative species from all six of these complexes and three
  outgroup (pomacentrid) genera were examined. Morphological characters, primarily osteological ones, were used to
  conduct a phylogenetic analysis of tills subfamily. The preliminary results will be presented and evolution of the fish­
  anemone relationship will be discussed.

  256                          09:00 Sunday                                GS1                                MCN
Morphological diversification and developmental variation in a Bahamian pupfish specif complex.
Holtmeier. Corson Hall, Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-2701 USA.
Variation in trophic morphology is widespread in teleosts. The sources of this variation have been explored in a
number of studies, and the genetic and environmental basis for extreme variation have been identified in a vanety
of fish. Here, I address the role development plays in producing phenotypic variation in a putabye speiss complex
of the Bahamian pupfish Cyprinodon . This taxon offers an excellent opportunity to address me ongin or
morphological variation in closely related species, because sympatrioally occurring Cyprinodon ^exhibit a striking
diversity in feeding morphology and behavior, yet putative species show only partial reproductive isolation.
Offspring from three species and their hybrids were bred in the lab, and ontogenetic trajectones of their feeding
morphology were followed until maturity. In Cyprinodon , very small differences in growth rates translate into large
differences in feeding morphology. This developmental program has implications for large-scale, macroevolutionary
patterns.




   ■257   .                    09:15 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN.
Revision of the South American shovelnose catfishes of the genus Sorubim (Slluriformes:Pimelodidae), with
a description of two new species. M.W. Littmann. Southern Illinois University, Dept, of Zoology, Carbondale, IL
62901-6501.
The systematics and'taxonomic history of the genus Sorubim (Teleostei: Pimelodidae) is unclear because of
confusing and inadequate descriptive taxonomic literature. To assess the taxonomic status of species in the genus, I
examined 347 specimens for morphological variation, including analysis of morphometry, menstics, osteology, and
pigmentation throughout the known geographic range. An extensive literature review of the fen n^ed species
allocated to Sorubim and analysis of morphological data support the recognition of four species: Sorubim lima,
widespread in the Amazon, Parana, and Orinoco basins; S. elongatus n. sp., rxcurnng in the Essequibo, Onnoco,
and upper Amazon drainages; S. caudacuspis n, sp., endemic to the Rio Magdalena and Lago Maracaibo drainages
in Northwestern South America; and S. trigonocephalus, known only from the Rio Tapajos region in Brazil. The
taxonomic revision presented includes a redesoription of the genus, recognition of two nominal species as valid,
descriotions of two new species, a dichotomous key, and distributional data for all nominal forms. Because of the
small sample sizes available for S. trigonocephalus, future study of this species is warranted. All species of Sorubim
are significant components of the ornamental fish trade and frequently found in local markets as a source of
subsistence protein.




                                09:30 Sunday                              .. GS1                               MCN ,
    258
 Phylogenetic relationships of the superfamily Poecilioidea (Cyprinodontiformes: Teleostei) as infeyed from
 morphological data. MJ Ghedotti. Natural History Museum. University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454 USA,

The superfamily Poecilioidea contains approximately 300 species of fishes in two families, the An^lepidae (13 spp.)
and the Poeciliidae (approx. 287 spp.). The monophyly of this superfamily has been supported by previous studies
using morphology and DNA sequence data. However, the phylogenetic relationships within the group have been
controversial. This phylogenetic analysis of over 90 transformation series and 30 representative poecilioid species
suDOorts the moiiophyly of the two included families.The poeciliine fnbes Heterandrini, Poeciliini, and
Cnesterodontini as traditionally recognized are shown to be nonmonophyletio. The facultatively viviparous speciss
Tomeurus gracilis is nested within the poeciliine tribe Cnesterodontini and represents an evolutionary loss of obligate
viviparity. Based on the phylogeny, the genus Aplocheilichthys should be restncted to the type species,
^Ixheilichthys spilauchen, and Micropanchax should be recognized as the valid genus for most wth®
^viously placed in Aplocheilichthys. The evolution of vivipanty and pelagic lacustnne habits in this group will be
discussed.




                                 'W'U'yi                                               .____ _____________ MCN
 Phylogenetic systematics of snubnose darters (Percidae) and the evolution of male breeding color. J.C.
 Porterfield. Illinois Natural History Survey, 607 East Peabody Drive, Champaign, IL 61820, USA.
 Snubnose darters are a fascinating group of fishes in the genus Etheostoma ; breeding males exhibit some of the
 most fantastic colors found in North American fishes. The results of an analysis of complete cytochrome b DNA
 sequences (1140 base pairs) for 32 species of snubnose darters and putative dose relatives are presented.
 Topologies obtained with parsimony, distance, and maximum likelihood criteria are congnient. The phylogenetic
 hypothesis supports relationships within snubnose darters that are corroborated with other evidence, although it
 differs from previous hypotheses in basal relationships. The cytochrome b gene tree suggests that snubnose
 darters are polyphyletic, with members of the subgenus Etheostoma s.s. related to one clade, and that members of
 the £ variatum species group are not closely related to snubnose darters or to Etheostoma s.s. The phylogeny is
 used for studying the evolution of several male breeding color characters that were coded and mapped onto the tree,
 and sexual selection experiments determined that these breeding colors were important to male reproductive
 success. This combination of evidence is used to propose a role for sexual selection in the differentiation of
 snubnose darter lineages and species.The phylogenetic systematics of the Goodeldae (Cyprinodontiformes). S.A. Webb. Division of Fishes - UMMZ,
University of Michigan, 1109 Geddes Ave,, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
Goodeine fishes are remarkable for the degree to which they provision developing embryos. A suite of physiological
and morphological traits permits internal fertilization, pronounced matrotrophy, and live birth in this natural group
from the central plateau of Mexico. Morphological and nucleic acid sequence (COI) data form the basis of a
phylogenetic analysis of goodeid interrelationships. Forty-one species from 18 genera comprise the ingroup, and
members of the Cyprinodontidae, Fundulidae, Poeciliidae, Prefundulidae, and Oxyzygonectes are utilized as
outgroups to polarize character states. Monophyty of the Goodeldae, and the sister-group relationship of the
Goodeinae and Empetrichthyinae, is supported. The Prefundulidae is supported as ths sister-group to the
Goodeldae. Early diversification events within the Goodeinae are not well supported, potentially indicating rapid
radiation of the major lineages. The evolution and biogeography of the Goodeldae will be discussed.




A preliminary phylogenetic analysis of the subfamily Amphlprlonlnae (Perclformes: Pomacontrldae). K.L.
Tang. Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454 USA.

The Amphiprioninae is a subfamily of marine fishes, commonly called anemonefishes, composed of two genera
{Amphiprion and Prenmas) with approximately 28 species. The phylogenetic relationships within this subfamily are
pooriy understood. Although a hypothetical set of relationships has been previously proposed, the phylogeny of the
group has never been fully examined. Previous work has suggested that the members of this subfamily are divided
among six species complexes. At least one representative species from all six of these complexes and three
outgroup (pomacentrid) genera were examined. Morphological characters, primarily osteological ones, were used to
conduct a phylogenetic analysis of this subfamily. The preliminary results will be presented and evolution of the fish­
anemone relationship will be discussed.




   260                          10:30 Sunday. ,                              GS1     .                         MCN
Molecular phylogeny of the gobloid fishes. C.E. Thacker. Museum of Zoology, Division of Fishes; University of
Michigan;, Ann Amor, Ml 48109 USA.
The perdform suborder Gobioidei contains an estimated 2000 species in 270 genera, found throughout the world
oceans and freshwaters. This lineage is very diverse and reductive evolution is common, m^ng traditional
morphological systematic studies particularly difficult. In an attempt to resolve relationships among gobioid groups, I
sequenced a 2022 base pair fragment of the mitochondrial penome, comprising the entire ND1 and ND2 genes for
40 gobioid species and performed phylogenetic analysis using cladistic parsimony methods. My data set includes
representatives of the Gobiidae (including all subfamilies: Gobiinae, Gobionellinae, Oxudercinae, Amblyopinae and
Sicydiinae), Microdesmidae (both subfamilies: Microdesminae and Ptereleotrinae), Kraemeriidae and Schindleriidae;
representatives of the Eleotrididae were used as outgroup taxa. Analysis of the nucleotide data yielded a single
phylogeny for which Bremer support and jackknife indices indicated weaker support in the deeper nodes. Analysis of
translated amino add data yielded two phylogenies differing only in the placement of one taxon; this phytogeny is
congruent in many respects with pobioid relationships suggested by morphological characters. My analysis provides
a broad view of gobioid relationships and, in particular, provides evidence for the relationships of the paedomorphic
Kraemeriidae and Schindleriidae within the Gobioidei.




   261                          10:45 Sunday                        ,       GS1                               MCN .
A phylogenetic study of the neotrc^ical hypopomid electric fishes (Rhamphichthyoidea: Gymnotiformes).
J.P. Sullivan. Cornell University, Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Neurobiology and Behavior, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.
The monophyly of the rhamphichthyoid gymnotifomns is supported by previous phylogenetic studies of gymnotiform
fishes. In contrast, the status and relationships of the constituent subgroups of the rhamphichthyoids remain pooriy
understood. The goal of this work was to determine whether the currently recognized rhamphichthyoid taxa
represent monophyletic groups and to ascertain the species-level relationships among them, with spedal emphasis
on the Family Hypopomidae Mago-Leccia, 1976. An additional goal was to gain insight into the evolution of the
species-specific electric organ discharge (EOD). A phylogenetic study of 23 fnamphienthyoid species was carried
out based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data from the portions of the 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA and cytochrome b
genes and a morphological data set. Results indicate that nominal hypopomid genera Steatogenys and Hypopygus
do not form a dade with other nominal hypopomids but strongly support the monophyly of me remaining nominal
hypopomids. Additionally, the nominal species of Brachyhypopomus form a clade with five new species. Genus
Brachyhypopomus is the sister taxon to the monotypic genus Microstemarchus which together form the sister group
to genus Hypopomus. Complex EODs and a monophasio EOD appear to have arisen within the Hypopomidae
independently of these character states in outgroup taxa.

Phylogenetic relationships of the superfamily Poecilioldea (Cyprinodontiformes: Teleostei) as Inferred from
morphological data. MJ Ghedotti. Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454 USA.

The superfamily Poecilioldea contains approximately 300 species of fishes in two families, the Anablepidae (13 spp.)
and the Poeciliidae (approx. 287 spp.). The monophyly of this superfamily has been supported by previous studies
using morphology and DNA sequence data. However, the phylogenetic relationships within the group have been
controversial. This phylogenetic analysis of over 90 transformation series and 30 representative poecilioid species
supports the monoph^ of the two included families.The poeciliine tribes Heterandrini, Poeciliini, and
Cnesterodontini as traditionally recognized are shown to be nonmonophyletic. The facultatively viviparous species
Tomeurus gracilis is nested within the poeciliine tribe Cnesterodontini and represents an evolutionary loss of obligate
viviparity. Based on the phylogeny, the genus Aplocheilichlhys should be restricted to the type species,
Aplocheilichthys spilauchen, and Micnmanchax should be recognized as the valid genus for most of the species
previously placed in Aplocheilichthys. The evolution of viviparity and pelagic laoustnne habits in this group will be
discussed.




Phylogenetic systematics of snubnose darters (Percldae) and ths evolution of male breeding color.                 J.C.
Porterfield. Illinois Natural History Survey, 607 East Peabody Drive, Champaign, IL 61820, USA.

Snubnose darters are a fasdnating group of fishes in the genus Etheostoma ; breeding males exhibit some of the
most fantastic colors found in North American fishes. The results of an analysis of complete cytochrome b DNA
sequences (1140 base pairs) for 32 species of snubnose darters and putative dose relatives are presented.
Topologies obtained with parsimony, distance, and maximum likelihood criteria are congntent. The phylogenetic
hypothesis supports relationships within snubnose darters that are corroborated with other evidence, although it
differs from previous hypotheses in basal relationships. The cytochrome b gene free suggests that snubnose
darters are polyphyletic, with members of the subgenus Etheostoma s.s. related to one clade, and that members of
the E. variatum species group are not closely related to snubnose darters or to Etheostoma s.s. The phylogeny is
used for studying the evolution of several male breeding color characters that were coded and mapped onto the tree,
and sexual selection experiments determined that these breeding colors were important to male reproductive
success. This combination of evidence is used to propose a role tor sexual selection in the differentiation of
snubnose darter lineages and species.




   263                          11:15 Sunday              _                  GS1     , .                       MCN
Speciation studies in the Percina subgenus Swainia (Percidae: Etheostomatinae). TJ. Near. Illinois Natural
History Survey.
Hypotheses concerning modes of allopatric speciation make expHcit predictions regarding patterns of phylogenetic
and biogeographic diversification. This investigation will test allopatric speciation models using phylogenetic and
biogeographic information for the subgenus Swainia, a monophyletic group of four described species in ths genus
Parana. Complete gene sequences of the mitoohondrially encoded cytochrome b have been collected from all
species of Swainia, including individuals from multiple populations of P. phoxocephala and P. nasuta. Patterns of
nucleotide variation were investigated and phylogenetic relationships were estimated using maximum parsimony,
maximum likelihood, and distance optimality criteria. Heterogeneity of nucleotide substitution rate was examined
using both maximum parsimony relative rate tests and a likelihood ratio test. Inferred phylogenetic relationships,
biogeographic patterns, and relative amounts of nucleotide divergence are used to develop hypotheses of speciation
in Swainia.




   264                          11:30 Sunday                               GS1                               MCN
Biogeography of Australian freshwater fishes: patterns of faunal occurrence in southeastern Australia. P.J.
Unrnack. Biology Department, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ 85287-1501, USA.
This presentation is part of a wider study of the biogeography of Australian freshwater fishes. Southeastern Australia
is hereby defined as coastal drainages from the Fitzroy River through Gulf of St. Vincent, including the inland Murray
system separated from coastal drainages by the Great Dividing Range. It has the following biogeographic
relationships of fishes restricted to freshwater 1) 5 of 8 species from southern Victoria also occur in the Murray
system: and 2) 18 of 27 spedes (or spedes pairs) co-occur between coastal Queensland drainages and ttie Murray
system. The relationships of an additional 6 species endemic to the Murray system are more obscure.
Biogeographic connectivity between the Murray and surrounding drainages thus appears high. Past biogeographic
explanations for these relationships have relied heavily upon river captures, making faunal distributions easily
explained. However, the last 15 years have seen a paradigm shift in the proposed evolution of the Great Dividing
Range including evidence that river captures are either non-existent or very old (> 30-60 mba). Most patterns are
congruent with present geological scenarios although exceptions exist. The new geologic conclusions are assessed
on the basis of biological evidence and new hypotheses are provided to explain present distribution patterns.                               11:45 Sunday                                GS1                              MCN
  265 .
Phylogenetic relationships and biogeography of the malagasy cichlidae. J,S- Sparks, Museum of Zoology. Fish
Division, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
Phylogenetic relationships of the endemic Malagasy cichHds were in^stigated uang| DNA                      ^ta and
yrtornhninnJrflt
cShttblLed       evidence PrioF atteiTiDts
                    on morpXSS             to generate
                                      evide^e,         a highly supported
                                                have been%nty               and resolvedl^ck
                                                                 paVlially successful,    phylogenetic
                                                                                              o?has    hypotnes^ rar
                                                                                                               been
attributed to muted anatomical variation and a high degree of convergence/parallelism within Cichlidae. DNA
seouence data is presented corresponding to two regions of the mitochondnal genome for a representative sarnpling
of cichlid taxa, including all of the known Malagasy cichlids. The use of molecular sequence date results in a highly
resolved ohvlooenetic hypothesis for Cichlidae. However, support for higher-level relationships is relatively weak,
and may mdroX that differentiation in ancient cichlid lineages occurred over a relatively short hme
based on DNA sequence data indicate that the Malagasy cichlids (including tee Asian 9®"“®
monophyletic that tee Etropline cichlids (Etroplus from India/Sri Lanka and Pe^efrop/us from todagarear) tom a
nSuS^^up. and that the Ptychochromine cichlids (including Oigd^ia) are a monophyleho Malagasy assemblage.
Biogeography of the Malagasy cichlids, and Cichlidae in general, will also be discussed.




                                                                            GS4                               AXL
   266                         08:00 Sunday


and Fisheries Sciences, College Station, Texas, 77843, USA.
An amohibian survey was initiated at Brazos Bend State Park. Fort Bend County, Texas to assess ane^otel
observations of anuran population declines. From Febroaiy to July 1997,12 amphibian species were documented at
the paS' Sixty-nine sites used by amphibians were identified, of which 73% confain®d Bvid®ncei of              **
does not ap^ar that amphibian species are in decline at Brazos Bend State Park. In February 1998 350 metere of
PVC Dice were installed at selected sites to evaluate the effectivness of this te^nique in regard to hylid frog
populSions. These and other sites are currently being monitoring in order to gain insight to amphibian population
dynamics at Brazos Bend State Park.




                                                                            GS4                                AXL I
    267                         08:15 Sunday
 Amphibian species distribution patterns in an agriculturally-fr^ment^ tendsrape.                           and R K-
 Swihart. Dept Foresty and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159, USA.
 Aooarent declines of amphibian populations in many parts of the world have caused great concern 'n/^nt^are.
 This study was conducted to determine what effects agriculturally induced fragmentation of forestsi has h^ on
 amphfwan assei^lages and their distribution in a midwestem landscape. Poteritial breed™ P?®'® ®nd uptend
 areas in 30 forest patches of various sizes and degrees of isolation were intensively sampled for amph te^s fiw
 April through August 1996 and March through August 1997. Speaes present was dr^mented by using pitfall
 trapping, anuran vocalization sunreys, cover board sampling, minnow traps, and dipnetting for larva.
 Amohibian anuran and salamander assemblages were all nonrandornly distributed across the landsc^e.'
 americancus and Hyla versicolor were ubiquitous whereas the distribution of several species      Amby^ma
 ST a f^X, Plethodon cinereus. Rana clarrritans, and R. pipiens showed significant^ne^ngK
 soecies richness was significantly associated with a weighted measure of wetland permanency (WETWGT,
 D-0 0001 WETWGTC2 p=0.0029), with forest patches which have seasonal and semi-permanent w^lands
 c^nfSninq more species. PAbundanie of amphibians was significantly associated with forest proximity (LOSPR,
 □-0 0001 LOGPRC2 p=0.0037), with more isolated patches having greater amphibian ^undance. ^e_°bse
 SistribiSon Srd degree^of nStedness exhibited by Mveral amphibians suggests that these species respond to
 iandscape-levet factors.




                                 Q3:'15 SL.»\iay     ...        __________GS4           .                      -AXL
  Impacts of tknber harvesting on surface activity bi terrestrial salamanders. S.M. Knaco. CA Haas and R L
  Kirkpatrick, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virginia Tech. Blacksburg, VA 24061-0321.
 Terrestrial salamanders spend the majority of their time in cool, moist refugia underground, but must surface to
 forage and breed. Although little is known about their surface activity patterns, abundance is usually inferred by
 ■counts of surface active salamanders on wet nights. Recently, such counts have been used to assess tee impacts of
 timber hanresting on terrestrial salamanders. It is assumed in these studies that the peroent of the population active
 on the surface is not altered by the treatment. We tested this assumption by conducting a mark-recapture study on
 hanrested and control plots. We found significantly different proportions active between treatments. At one location,
 tee hanrested plot had a lower peroent active than its control (Plethodon cinereus: 4.0% vs. 9.2%, p=.O21; P.
 glutinosus: 3.8% vs. 11.7%, p=.O91). At the other location, the harvested plots had a higher percent active than their
 controls (P. cinereus: 4.2% and 3.9% vs. 1.6% and 1.3%, p=.O17). At this site, surface counts indicated there were
 more salamanders on ihe harvested plots than on tee controls, but mark-recapture estimates indicated there were
 actually twice as many salamanders on the control plots.

                               08:30 Sunday                                 GS4                                AXL
  268
Response of the herpetofaunal community to three sandhill restoration teeabnente on EgUn'
Florida. A.R. Litt. Department of Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of Florida, Box 110430, Gainesville,
FL 32611-430.
The longleaf pine ecosystem, once widespread in the southeastern United States, has been reduced by as riiuch as
98%. Restoration of this endangered ecosystem can be a mechanism for conservation, in ari attempt to rewrse
existing damage and create more resilient communities. Restoration metlKids implemented in sandfells rpust te
based in a deep knowledge of the ecosystem to effectively recreate and manage all aspects. ^°P®®9®®P^y;
restoration success can only be evaluated by examining community response. Since reptiles and                    ^®
occupy the ecosystem at a fairly small scale, these communities may              important indicatore of microhabi^
restoi^ion success. Previous work on herpetofaunal response to disturbance regimes has                          "J®
complexity of the effects and the importance of habitat structure. Habitat requirements for ®andhHI herpetof^na are
very diverse, demonstrating the need to closely examine these communities when making managemenr^ecisions.
My^stoidyTficus^ on reptiles and amphibia/is. is one portion of a rpulS-agency investigation of ’teree s^dhill
restoration techniques on Eglin Air Force Base, Rorida: fire, oak-speafio herbicide, and mechanic! oak fetag.
Pitfall traps and drift fences were used to capture reptiles and amphibians in restoration treatment areas, control
plots and "typical' longleaf pine sandhill areas during the summer of 1997. Animds were identified to specre^
marked, sexed, weighed, measured, and visually examined. Vegetative cover date were a so collated, ^e
obiective of this project is to examine heqjetofaunal species richness and abundance, as well as population age
class structure and sex ratios, with regards to the restoration treatment and vegetative stnicture.



                               08:45 Sunday                                 GS4.                               AXL
   269
 Anuran assemblages in anthropogenically and pyrogeniMlly dfeturbed landscgjes of the
boreal forest. J.M.Constible. Department of Biology, University of Victoria, PO Box 3020 STN, CSC, Victoria bg
V8W 3N5, Canada.
Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries Inc. (AL-PAC) operates a large pulp mill in the mixed-wood boreal forest of
northeastern Alberta. The company harvests within its 6,000,000 ha Forest Management Area (™A) usingan
'ecosystem manaqemenf perspective. In other words, AL-PAC attempts to mimic fire, the dominant ri^ui^
disturbahce of the boreal forest. Five amphibian species, including two that appear to have undergone population
declines occur in the FMA. In 1997,1 sampled anuran communities at 12 lakes to investigate whether each species
showed the same relative abundance in logged, naturally burned, and undistorbed areas. ®®?Pj°y®^
surveys transect sampling, egg and larval searches, and metamorph searches. Additionally, I conducted yegel^ on
surveys on each transect to quantitatively examine differences in habitat. Preliminary results suggest that lakes with
adjacent cutblocks support the highest number of amphibians; however, this may be a function of lake size, distance
from active roads, or forest type. An analysis to separate these effects is underway.




    270                         09:00 Sunday                 .               GS4
 The effects of    forest-pasture edges on the herpetofauna of Fila CruMS, Costa Rica.                M,A. Schlaepfer,
 Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-3001, USA.
 Human activities tend to create highly fragmented land^apes, thereby ®’TOsing                     nnrJnfetfons^U^sfnVa
 edges. I am interested in the impacts of forest-pasture edges on the dynamic of frog and tord                   Y®^®
 nafred-olot desiqn I described the abundance and distnbution of lizards (Norops. spp.) and leafJitter frogs
 ^Eleutherodactylus spp.) in 10 forest fragments near Las Cruces. Costa Rica. Pie study took place from Febroaiy to
 June 1997 and covered both dry and wet seasons. No species was defiriitively absent frorn tee edge plots.
 Nocturnal leaf-litter frogs were generally equally abundant near forest edges and lo forest intenors. The single dium^
 eleuteerodactylid speaes, however, was consistently more abund^t in the forest 'ntenore.
 edae effects may be stronger during the day than at night. Anolme lizards were more abundant at tee ed^s during
 tee dry season but became more abundant in forest interiors during the wet season. This seasonal vanation adds a
 new dfmension to our understanding of edge effects, and carnes important practical implications for fteure stodies.
 The reproductive period of the lizards, which coincides with the rainy season, as well as lower rates of parasitism on
 anoline lizards near edges, are offered as possible explanations for the observed seasonal pattern.




     274                       , 10:30'Sunday                                GS4                  ,             AXL
  Genetic diversity in drought-impacted populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Cleinmya marmorata
  pallida. C.M. Ingram and J.W. Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University. Lonq Beach
  Long Beach CA 90840-3702 USA.

  Populations that experience a large reduction in effective size are expected to exhibit a bottleneck effect which will
 include loss of heterozygosity and loss of alleles. Populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clemmys rrtarmorata
 pallida, in Central and Southern California were impacted by an extended drought teat occurred from 1987-1992 and
 exhibited local population size decreases up to 85% during this period. I examined changes in genetic diversity in
 four populations of C. mannorata in tee drought affected area by comparing microsatellite DNA allele frequencies
 from tissue samples collected before and after this drought period. Genotypes of five microsatellite loci were
 determined to assess tee genetic diversity within these samples. Heterozygosity was used as a measurement of
 genetic diversity. Although no significant decline in heterozygosity was shown in the five loci, there was a decrease
 in the number of alleles present in tee most severed impacted population. Since most individuals teat were present
 in ths post-drought samples were sun/ivors of tee drought, the first sign of decreased genetic diversity would be tee
 loss of alleles. Changes in tee level of genetic diversity (heterozygosity) would only be detectable in subsequent
 post-drought generations.Amphibian species distribution patterns in an agricutturalty-fra^ented iandscape. M.B, Kolozsvarv and R.K.
Swihart, Dept. Foresty and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159, USA.
Apparent declines of amphibian populations in many parts of the world have caused great concern in recent years.
This study was conducted to determine what effects agriculturally induced fragmentation of forests has had on
amphibian assemblages and their distribution in a midwestem landscape. Potential breeding pools and upland
areas in 30 forest patches of various sizes and degrees of isolation were intensively sampled for amphibians from
April through August 1996 and March through August 1997. Species presence was documented by using pitfall
trapping, anuran vocalization surveys, cover board sampling, minnow traps, and dipnetting for larva.
Amphibian, anuran and salamander assemblages were all nonrandomly distributed across the landscape. Bufo
americancus and Hyla versicolor were ubiquitous whereas the distribution of several species including Ambystoma
tigrinum, A. texanum, Plethodon cinereus, Rana clamitans, and R. pipiens showed significant nesting. Overall,
species richness was significantly associated with a weighted measure of wetlano permanency (WETWGT,
p=0.0001, WETWGTC2, p=0.0029), with forest patches which have seasonal and semi-permanent wetlands
■containing rhore species. Abundance of amphibians was significantly associated with forest proximity (LOGPR,
p=0.0001, LOGPRC2, p=0.0037), with more isolated patches having greater amphibian abundance. The observed
distribution and degree of nestedness eidiibited by several amphibians suggests that these species respond to
landscape-level factors.




   271                       .. 09:15 Sunday. .                             CJS4                       AXL
Impacts of timber harvesting on surface activity in terrestrial salamanders. S.M. Knapp. C.A. Haas and R.L.
Kirkpatrick, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 -0321.

Terrestrial salamanders spend ths majority of their time in cool, moist refugia underground, but must surface to
forage and breed. Although little is known about their surface activity patterns, abundance is usually Inferred by
counts of surface active salamanders on wet nights. Recently, such counts have been used to assess the impacts of
timber harvesting on terrestrial salamanders. It is assumed in these studies that the percent of the population active
on the surface is not altered by the treatment. We tested this assumption by conducting a mark-recapture study on