versity, distribution, Iyanomo, Nigeria



Ohmer, Michel E. (University of Otago); McKenzie, Kate; Daglish, Lisa (Department of Conservation,
New Zealand, Canada); Bishop, Phillip J. (University of Otago, Canada)

Long-term monitoring of the effects of endemic disease and predator exclusion on survival in a
population of threatened New Zealand amphibians

We have witnessed a dramatic decline in amphibian populations globally. While we can identify many
factors contributing to those declines, there is comparatively less evidence for the combined effects of
multiple stressors, particularly in wild populations. In New Zealand, two introduced threats have been
considered to be the leading causes of declines in endemic frog species: the fungal pathogen,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), and mammalian predators (e.g. rats and mice). Utilizing a 5-year
mark-recapture dataset from a population of the endemic species Leiopelma archeyi , we investigated
the combined effects of disease and introduced predators on individual survival and population dynamics.
We applied multistate models in the program MARK to four 10 x 10 m grids of equal habitat quality re-
sampled twice yearly, all of which experience endemic levels of Bd infection and two of which were
predator excluded. Initial analyses indicate a reduction in survival probability (approximately 13%) in
infected frogs within predator-accessible grids. A similar reduction in survival was not observed in infected
frogs within predator-excluded grids. Analyses incorporating individual and time-varying environmental
covariates are currently underway. Recent work indicates New Zealand‘s endemic Leiopelmatid frogs
experience low susceptibility to Bd infection in the laboratory. However, the interaction of multiple
stressors, such as introduced predators and disease, may lead to reduced immunocompetence in this
species. Thus, investigations of the effects of multiple stressors within threatened populations, such as
this one, can better focus management decisions.



Okada, Sumio (Tottori University); Fukuda, Yukihiro; Yuki, Etsuko (TopOutImages, Canada); Okada,
Tamami (Mt.Hyonosen Forest Museum, Canada)

Field observations of parental care of egg masses by male Japanese giant salamanders, Andrias
japonicus

Although it is well-documented that male parental care occurs in Andrias japonicus and other
Cryptobranchid salamanders, no one has described how males actually care for eggs in breeding nests.
We recorded parental care behavior of male Andrias japonicus in one natural and one artificial nest in
Tottori and Hyogo Prefectures using a video camera between August and November, 2010. We analyzed
den masters‘ behavior over 6 days (34hrs total) and 5 days (29 hrs total) in the natural and artificial nest,
respectively, as percentage of total time observed displaying a given behavior per day. Parental care
behaviors were classed into four main categories: agitation (moving of eggs with head or body), tail




                                                                                                         521
fanning, feeding (eating of eggs, skin, etc.) and swaying (side-to-side male body movements). Agitation
was observed at a similar frequency in both nests (artificial nest: 9.6-19.8%, natural nest: 2.2-19.8%). In
the artificial nest, tail fanning was frequently observed, and averaged 30.6% (range: 12.6-46.2%). In
contrast, in the natural nest, tail fanning was observed an average of 0.2% (range: 0-1.2%). We observed
denmasters taking eggs out of masses with their mouths and we think that this behavior functions to
remove undeveloped eggs. We estimated water quality of both nests three times between July and
September, 2011. DO (dissolved oxygen) in the artificial nest was noticeably lower than in the center of
the adjacent stream (nest: 4.6-5.9 mg/L, stream: 8.6-9.2 mg/L), whereas DO in the natural nest was only
slightly lower than the center of the adjacent stream (nest: 7.7-8.5 mg/L, stream: 8.8-9.7 mg/L). We
hypothesize that lower DO levels in the artificial nest resulting from low levels of water inflow from the
adjacent stream led to the high frequency of tail fanning behavior by males. These behaviors likely help
facilitate the diffusion of oxygen into the egg mass, thereby preventing yolk adhesion and spread of fungi.
Our observations also indicate the need for future experimental studies of relationships between male
behavior and DO levels and egg mortality, and also for observation of post-hatching male behaviors.



Okada, Sumio (Tottori University); Okada, Tamami (Mt.Hyonosen Forest Museum, Canada); Felix, Zach
(Reinhardt University, Canada)

Natural History and Conservation Status of the Japanese giant salamander, Andrias japonicus in
the Chugoku Mountains

The Japanese giant salamander ( Andrias japonicus ) is one of the largest extant amphibians in the world.
Western Honshu Island, especially the Chugoku Mountains contains a major portion of A. japonicus ‘s
range. Although A. japonicus is threatened with extinction as a consequence of habitat degradation,
baseline data on population structure, size, and density are limited. We conducted mark-recapture and
radio-telemetric studies of A. japonicus to evaluate population demography, reproductive ecology
including breeding migrations, diet composition and dam impact within relatively natural and disturbed
habitats in the Hino River, Tottori Prefecture between 2001 and 2011. One section of the river, the upper
portion, was relatively undisturbed and ran through a wooded area, and the other section, the lower
portion, was more heavily disturbed and ran through an agriculturally-dominated area. Our results
revealed that adult A. japonicus are abundant in both the relatively natural and disturbed areas. Giant
salamanders in the lower portion were larger and heavier than those in the upper portion, and we
recorded fewer salamanders in small size classes (younger individuals) in the lower portion than the
upper portion. These data suggest that giant salamanders experience lower recruitment in the lower
portion than in the upper portion, possibly due to reduced availability of nesting sites and/or larval and
juvenile microhabitats as a result of habitat degradation. In the upper portion, females moved between
stream sections to reach nesting sites and spawn, and in the lower more disturbed portion many
salamanders used nesting sites within branch streams and migrated multiple directions within both main
and branch streams. Availability of spawning nests is relatively limited and nests are frequently destroyed
by disturbances such as floods throughout the study area. Because of the ephemeral nature and limited
availability of nests, A. japonicus must be able to migrate between sections to reach newly create nests.
In the lower portion however, the movements of many salamanders were interrupted by dams during the
breeding season. These data provide essential baseline information on an A. japonicus population
across a habitat gradient from relatively natural habitat to disturbed stream habitat flowing through
human-dominated areas.




                                                                                                       522
Okamoto, Taku (Center for Environmental Biology and Ecosystem Studies, National Institute for
Environmental Studies);

Recent taxonomic changes of the common skinks of genus Plestiodon (Scincidae, Squamata) on
the Japanese main islands, the Izu Islands, and far eastern Russia

The skinks of genus Plestiodon (formerly Eumeces ) in the Japanese main islands and far eastern
Russia had long been recognized as Eumeces latiscutatus (Hallowell, 1861), and the populations on
the Izu Islands, central Japan, had been treated as Eumeces okadae Stejneger, 1907 (e . g., Taylor,
1936; Uetz, 2011). However, several recent molecular systematic studies have clarified the followings:
the population of the Izu Peninsula (including the type locality of E. latiscutatus ) is distinct from those of
remaining parts of the entire Japanese main islands, and closely related to E. okadae (Motokawa and
Hikida, 2003); and the populations of eastern and western part of the Japanese main islands are
genetically distinct with reproductive isolation (Okamoto and Hikida, 2009). After the generic classification
has been revised (Smith, 2005; Brandley et al . 2005), the Japanese species are currently placed in
Plestiodon . Thus, the following three parapatric species should be recognized at present: Plestiodon
latiscutatus on the Izu Peninsula and the Izu Islands ( E. okadae is a junior synonym of it); P.
japonicus (Peters, 1864) on the western part of Japan; and an undescribed species on the eastern part
of Japan. Our recent taxonomic revision have clarified that these three species can be identified by
diagnoses of scale morphology and DNA barcode, and far eastern Russian population should be
conspecific with the undescribed species of the eastern Japan (Okamoto and Hikida, submitted).



Olave, Melisa (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Sites, Jack W (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada);
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

A well-supported species tree of the Eulaemus clade (SQUAMATA: LIOLAEMUS): Evidence of an
ancient radiation

The lizard genus Liolaemus is endemic to an extensive area of temperate South America and includes
235 recognized species. Since Laurent‘s (1983) morphological study, the genus has been divided into
two subgenera: Liolaemus (or the chiliensis group) and Eulaemus (or the Argentinean group),
distributed mainly to the west (Chile) and east (Argentina) of the Andes, respectively. Morphological and
mitochondrial characters have been used to propose phylogenetic hypotheses for different clades within
this genus, and most of these are based on incomplete taxon sampling and limited intraspecific sampling.
In this work we present the first well-supported molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade
Eulaemus , based on 12 nuclear molecular markers (protein coding loci &amp; anonymous loci) as well
as two mitochondrial markers (cytb-12S; ~ 10,500 bp total). This clade includes 77 described species,
and we included multiple representatives from all larger groups within it, including new candidate species.
We analyzed the dataset using different species tree approaches (*BEAST, BEST, STEM and MDC) and
compare these results with traditional concatenated analyses. We also present fossil-calibrated
divergence estimates (using BEAST), and discuss a possible ancient radiation for most of the larger
Eulaemus clades.




                                                                                                           523
Olgun, Kurtulus (Adnan Menderes University);

Systematics and Phylogeny of Genus Ophisops (Reptilia:Sauria) in Mainland and Islands of
Turkey

Genus Ophisops (Snake-eyed Lizard) is represented by eight species world-wide. Only one of these
species Ophisops elegans is present in Turkey as well as is recorded from Israel, Lebanon, Syria,
Jordan, Iraq and Iran. This species was first discovered from Bakû by Ménétriés in 1832. Ophisops
elegans is very common in the Mediterranean ecological zone. But it is also distributed around the Irano-
Turanian ecozone. It can be seen in suitable biotopes from 400 meters below to and 1.100 meters above
sea level. Taking the previous studies carried out into consideration, evaluations on the taxonomic
status of the Ophisops elegans can be divided into the three time periods. First of these periods is the
studies accomplished up to 1978 and they suggests three subspecies for O. elegans . Second one
comprises the works carried out between 1978 and 1993 that suggests a fourth subspecies in addition to
existing three subspecies. At this period, it has been proposed that subspecies present in Turkey,
particularly in Lake District and South-eastern Anatolia region, need to be studied in detail. Lastly, studies
have been published from 1993 to date have put forwarded that it is not possible to solve the taxonomic
status of Ophisops elegans using only morphological characteristics. In order to resolve the taxonomic
status of this species, molecular systematic approaches could be very useful. In the light of this
information, specimens of Ophisops were collected from all over Turkey and some of the islands located
in Aegean Sea of the Turkish cost. Then various morfometric measurements and folidosis values were
taken and analysed statistically in order to determine the differences between populations from different
localities. Cyt b and 16S rRNA sequences of mitochondrial DNA of Ophisops specimens were
analysed to clarify taxonomical position of differentiated population and to construct a phylogenetic tree.
Based on the phylogenetic analyses, two main monophyletic groups (species taxon) of Ophisops have
been recovered in Turkey; one includes Artvin (Eastern Blacksea Region), Ardahan, Kars, Iğdır, Van,
Hakkari, Şırnak, Muş (East Anatolia Region), Mardin and Batman (Southeast Anatolia Region)
populations and the other comprises the remaining populations. There are a total of nine difrentiated
populations (subspecies taxon) beloning to these two monophyletic groups.



Oliveira, Adriele Karlokoski Cunha de (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Oliveira, Igor Soares de
(Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil)

Natural history and cytogenetic of Sphaenorhynchus surdus (Anura: Hylidae): an endemic frog of
Brazilian Southern Atlantic forest

Sphaenorhynchus Tschudi, 1838 is a genus with fourteen species and it is currently considered a sister
genus of Dendropsophus and Xenohyla. This genus is distributed throughout South America with ten
species restricted to the Brazilian Atlantic forest. Sphaenorhynchus surdus (Cochran, 1953) is one of
these species and it is distributed in the states of Paraná, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul, in
Southern Brazil. This taxon was recently divided in two species, S. surdus and S. caramaschii. However,
there is a lack of information about the biology of both species. Hereby we provide a description of natural
history traits and show preliminary data of cytogenetic for S. surdus. Information about this species is very
scarce and we provide the first karyotype approach for this taxa, as well as to the genus
Sphaenorhynchus. Our study was conducted in the Atlantic forest, in the Araucaria forest domain. We
conducted our surveys from August 2009 to July 2010. We collected data about activity patterns and use
of microhabitat. For the karyotype analysis we performed conventional staining to determine the
chromosome number and morphology, and location of the Nuclear Organization Region (NOR) by Ag-




                                                                                                          524
NOR staining. Sphaenorhynchus surdus was observed in exclusively nocturnal calling activity during
eight months (August 2009 to March 2010). The abundance of calling males was positively related with
temperature, an expected pattern for a Southern species. Sphanorhyncus surdus was observed in
permanent ponds on floating vegetation inside lentic water during calling activity, probably due to its
reproductive mode (presumably number 1). The karyotype of S. surdus comprises 24 metacentric and
submetacentric chromosomes with Fundamental Number (FN) equal to 48. Secondary constriction was
detected in the terminal region of both homologues of chromosome 11, which were detected as NOR.
The karyotype number of S. surdus is different of its sister genus Dendropsophus, which has 2n=30. This
is a preliminary approach of cytogenetic of S. surdus and further studies are necessary with more
resolute techniques to understand the karyotype evolution of the genus.



Oliveira, Igor Soares de (Universidade Estadual de Campinas); Toledo, Luís Felipe (Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander
Koenig, Bonn, Germany)

One more threat to frogs: a modeling approach

Currently, climate change is the focus for several studies, due its potential consequences on society and
global biodiversity. One of the main effects of climate change is global warming, which in turn, could
cause the sea level rising. The rise of the sea level may threat the terrestrial fauna, particularly species
with home ranges restrict to coastal zones. Among terrestrial vertebrates, several species of anurans
worldwide are distributed exclusively in these areas. Hereby we present a list of anurans potentially
threatened by sea level rising. We analyzed 5609 species available from the IUCN database, considering
only the species with available distribution maps and information about altitudinal distribution. We filtered
for those species with distribution from sea level up to 500 meters in altitude. Then we compared each
map with a six meters sea elevation scenario, selecting species with small range distribution areas and
distributed in future flooded zones. We identified 177 taxa of 30 families (3,15% of the species of our
dataset), under potential threat of flooding, with partial or total area loss, based on the present
distribution. Among these species, 65 are considered ―Data Deficient‖ (DD), 44 ―Least Concern‖ (LC), six
―Near Threat‖ (NT), 23 ―Vulnerable‖ (VU), 25 ―Endangered‖ (EN), and 14 ―Critically Endangered‖ (CR),
according to IUCN endangered species list. We found a difference of 113 species between taxa indicated
by IUCN database as threatened by flooding (64) and our results. Thus we indicate the sea level rising as
an important threat to anurans in the near future. Amphibians are already the most threatened animal
group, being affected mainly by pandemic diseases, pollution, habitat loss and fragmentation. One more
cause can severely accelerate the group decline, jeopardizing entire ecosystems, ultimately affecting
human society.



Oliveira, Igor Soares de (Universidade Estadual de Campinas); Pereira, Elder Ribeiro; Ribeiro, Vanessa
Maria; Vitule, Jean Ricardo Simões (Laboratório de Ecologia e Conservação, Canada)

Predation of alien invasive vertebrates on brazilian amphibians: report of two cases in the atlantic
forest hotspot

Predation, in the sense of an organism killing another for nutritional purposes, is probably as old as life
itself and has originated many times during the history of life. Amphibians are often preyed by
vertebrates, which in turn serve as meal for amphibians in a few cases. Natural dynamics of predator-prey
interactions may result in different effects on prey. However, invasive predators may cause decline in



                                                                                                         525
natural prey population. Rats are ubiquitous opportunistic predator, introduced in several islands and
continents, often pressuring native species. In a similar way, fishes are organisms largely introduced and
may to affect severely native populations. Herein we report two cases of predation on native frogs in
Atlantic forest hotspot. One individual of Rattus norvegicus was observed preying on an adult individual
male of Rhinella icterica. In the second case, a native Hypsiboas sp. was found in stomach contents of an
individual of Black Bass (Micropterus salmoides), a North American introduced fish. These observations
may indicate that native species are suffering direct interference by invaders, due to predation on native
prey or competition for the same niche as native predators. Invasive predators are one of the causes of
amphibian population decline worldwide. A possible negative impact of predation by introduced
vertebrates probably are further significant on anuran species than we can detect, once there are few
cases reported. Thus, studies with invasive species are needed to clarify its biology and its impacts on
native species, providing a more effective conservation.



Oliver, Lauren (Louisiana State University); Rittmeyer, Eric (Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA, United States); Kraus, Fred (Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu, HI, United States); Richards,
Stephen (Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory, Darwin, NT, Australia); Austin, Christopher
(Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, United States)

Phylogeny and phylogeography of Mantophryne (Anura: Microhylidae) reveals cryptic diversity in
New Guinea

The island of New Guinea is one of only five high-biodiversity regions in the world and frog diversity is
exceptionally large on the island with more than 400 known species with many new species described
annually. The terrestrial frog genus Mantophryne is composed of four species, three of which have
narrow geographic distributions. In contrast, the fourth species, Mantophryne lateralis, is wide-ranging
and distributed throughout the lowland forests on the eastern half of the island. This broad range is
concordant with many other amphibian groups and thus makes M. lateralis a good initial candidate for
examining patterns of genetic diversity in eastern New Guinea. Here, we sequence 104 ingroup samples
for 3 mitochondrial and 3 nuclear loci to reconstruct the phylogeny of the genus and examine spatial and
temporal patterns of diversity. Biogeographic analysis suggests the genus may have evolved on the
eastern Papuan peninsula before dispersing west along the north and south coasts and east to the
D‘Entrecastaux and Louisidade archipelagos. Phylogenetic results show that M. infulata is more closely
related to the sister genus Hylophorbus and that the monotypic genus Pherohapsis is nested within
Mantophryne. The wide ranging M. lateralis is composed of at least nine geographically separated and
well supported lineages that represent putative species and these results imply that other amphibian
species with similar distributions might also contain cryptic diversity.



Oliver, Paul (The University of Melbourne);

Understanding the origins and diversification of a diverse continental fauna: insights from
downunder.

Despite a long history of isolation Australia has one of the most diverse squamate faunas in the world
(900+ species). It is only in last decade that a suite of molecular dating studies have provided a believably
accurate window into history of this fauna. Work to date has confirmed that the majority of lineages are
relatively recent overwater migrants from Asia; with only one lineage of geckos showing clear evidence of
persistence since the break up of Gondwana. Irregardless of biogeographic origins, it now also appears



                                                                                                         526
that diversity in all extent lineages is relatively young, current evidence suggests that at most ten extant
lineages were present more 30 million years ago.



Olker, Jennifer (Natural Resources Research Institute - University of Minnesota Duluth); Schoff, Patrick
(Natural Resources Research Institute - University of Minnesota Duluth, Canada); Wagner, Angela
(USDA ARS, North Central Agricultural Research, Canada); Guntenspergen, Glenn (USGS Patuxent
Wildlife Research Center, Canada); Johnson, Lucinda (Natural Resources Research Institute - University
of Minnesota Duluth, Canada)

Lessons learned from multiscale studies of somatic and gonadal development in two native
amphibian species

Aquatic organisms are exposed to a variety of stressors that may be benign individually but interact to
negatively impact health and survival of individuals and populations. Understanding how anthropogenic
and natural stressors interact in aquatic ecosystems is challenging because the complexity produced by
multiple stressors is not easily replicated in controlled experiments. We investigated multiple stressors
using a multiscale approach, with amphibians as models for wildlife populations and indicators of wetland
health. We assessed the range and distribution of landscape and within-wetland stressors across the
upper Midwest US, focusing on atrazine (a commonly used herbicide) and climate change for in-depth
investigations. Organismal responses included growth, development, and gonadal morphology in two
native frogs ( Rana pipiens and Rana sylvatica ) in field surveys and mesocosm experiments, which
were conducted 1) across a range of environmentally relevant atrazine concentrations, and 2) in
combination and interaction with accelerated pond-drying as an anticipated consequence of climate
change. Field analyses indicated that potential amphibian stressors were widely distributed across the
region, with few areas free of detectable atrazine. In mesocosm experiments, atrazine exposure altered
development and slightly reduced survival in both species, while accelerated pond-drying had no
independent or strong interactive effects. Testicular oocytes, which indicate potential endocrine
disruption, were found in experimental and field-collected specimens with no relationship to atrazine
concentration and significantly different prevalence between species. Lessons from this series of
investigations emphasize that effective understanding of the role of agrochemicals in amphibian
population declines and ecosystem impacts must include studies at multiple scales, combining controlled
experimental exposures and field observations using standard laboratory models as well as native
species.



Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station); Burnett, Kelly (US Forest
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Corvallis, United States)

Aquatic-terrestrial connectivity designs in forests: funnels and chains across landscapes

Our managed forest landscape connectivity design targets headwater streams to create a web of
connections across the landscape, likely benefiting numerous forest-dependent species, especially
amphibians. In managed forests, stream-riparian management zones are used as foraging, breeding, and
dispersal habitat by a wide variety of species with both aquatic and terrestrial affiliations. Overland
dispersal of organisms between watersheds serves to connect populations of many taxonomic groups
among basins across forested landscapes. Small streams and their associated riparian areas are useful
points within a landscape for linking basins across ridgelines because such headwaters are frequent and
are in relatively close proximity to adjacent drainages. Riparian management designs that serve to




                                                                                                        527
―funnel‖ organisms to headwater areas where ―chains‖ of habitat across ridgelines are provided may aid
landscape-scale population connectivity. Landscape management considerations for placement of
headwater linkage areas include: 1) targeting connections at landscape nodes where three discrete
watersheds (―triads‖) join; 2) maintaining north-south, east-west, and elevational habitat connectivity in
the face of climate change; 3) incorporation of place-based disturbance regimes such as headwater
debris-flow-prone areas; 4) targeting connectivity areas to address sensitive species conservation
strongholds; and 5) geometric considerations at the forest-stand scale of a single project or proposed
timber sale, including managing habitats to connect adjacent forest ownerships, such as to connect
corners of checkerboard landscape blocks along diagonals. At finer spatial scales, management
approaches for habitat ―funnels‖ along riparian zones and ―chains‖ across ridgelines include retention or
restoration of forest structural components and green tree retention. Data from our headwater stream
amphibian studies in the U.S. northwest suggest that our ‗funnel and chain‘ linkage area design would
address forest fragmentation effects from timber harvesting and benefit multiple species.



Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station); Nanjappa, Priya (Association
of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, Washington, D.C., United States); Riley, Terry (Partners in Amphibian and
Reptile Conservation, Denver, United States); Breisch, Alvin (Partners in Amphibian and Reptile
Conservation, Altamont, United States); Conrad, Polly (Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation,
Logan, United States)

Herpetological Conservation Paradigms: The PARC Kaleidoscope

To encourage a more in-depth focus on the long-term goals of herpetofauna species and habitat
sustainability, Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation is exploring new paradigms of
conservation program implementation. Our historical partnership model engages government agencies in
formal memoranda of understanding, and other entities such as private industry, non-governmental
organizations, nature centers, educators, researchers, and individuals in informal volunteer liaisons. Our
rotating ―Year of‖ campaigns (2011−Year of the Turtle; 2012−Year of the Lizard; 2013−Year of the Snake)
are proving to have numerous benefits, on practical, sociological, and professional fronts. For our fast-
paced world, focusing on a single, annually-changing taxon piques and sustains public interest.
Additionally, our diverse professional workforce can address and develop tools effectively relative to one
set of topics at a time. Each year involves a different suite of partners and reaches out to different sectors
of the public, demographically and geographically. Emphasizing taxon-specific issues provides depth to
our campaigns. Raising awareness for conservation and research needs continues to yield resources to
expand capabilities in these dimensions after the ―year‖ ends. For instance, the earlier 2008−Year of the
Frog led by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums had a focus on disease issues and ex-situ
conservation, and this advocacy was leveraged by many others and has resulted in tremendous growth in
our global research capacity in these areas since 2008. Year of the Turtle (www.yearoftheturtle.org)
highlighted conservation and trade issues, with new regulatory emphasis emerging now for the
sustainable use of all herpetofauna. Year of the Lizard (www.yearofthelizard.org) is developing a strong
emphasis in both research and education in 2012, and Year of the Snake likely will be even more closely
focused on education in order to raise awareness for the most misunderstood reptile group. Our diverse
portfolio of activities is a conservation kaleidoscope, offering a colorful palette of tools and approaches.
We hope to expand our toolbox of approaches to match emerging topics.




                                                                                                          528
Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station); Leirness, jeffery; Cunningham,
Patrick (US Forest Service, Corvallis, United States); Steel, Ashley (US Forest Service, Seattle, United
States)

Riparian buffers and forest thinning: Effects on headwater amphibians after 5 and 10 years

The Density Management and Riparian Buffer Study of western Oregon, USA was initiated in 1994 to
assess: 1) upland forest density management approaches to accelerate development of late-successional
forest characteristics in managed federal forests; and 2) the efficacy of alternative riparian buffer widths
along headwater streams, in the context of upland thinning, to retain key aquatic resources. Instream-
and streambank-dwelling amphibians were monitored as part of the riparian component, using a
before/after/control methodology. We analyzed animal counts along 45 stream reaches at 8 study sites,
distributed from the foothills of Mount Hood to Coos Bay, Oregon from data collected in one year pre-
treatment and years 1, 2, 5 and 10 post-treatment. Using linear regression, we sought the simplest model
to explain the variability in post-treatment animal abundances at the reach scale, after accounting for pre-
treatment counts. Bank models analyzed all amphibians, all terrestrial-breeding amphibians, Plethodon
dunni and P. vehiculum. Instream models analyzed all vertebrates, all amphibians, stream-breeding
amphibians, Dicamptodon tenebrosus, and Rhyacotriton species. Streambank models included buffer
treatment, survey area, stream width, re-treatment count, and no. days post-treatment. Instream models
also included survey method, hand sampling or electrofishing. Along banks, pre-treatment counts alone
were adequate to explain variation in amphibian numbers, but there was support for a negative effect of
the narrowest buffer for all groups analyzed except P. vehiculum. For all species groups analyzed
instream, more complex relationships resulted, with important covariates including pre-treatment counts,
stream width, and buffers. Decreasing counts over time in reaches with the narrowest buffer were
evident.



O'Regan, Sacha (Simon Fraser University); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
Canada)

Extending the utility of species-specific data for amphibian conservation; using population data to
evaluate density-dependence and predict the relative vulnerability of species

Enigmatic amphibian declines have stimulated a tremendous amount of research into potential drivers of
decline. Over a decade of research, however, has revealed few predictive lessons that can be applied to
prevent declines in advance of their occurrence. We evaluated whether a population dynamics
framework, and specifically the presence of density-dependent bottlenecks in complex life cycles, can be
used to predict how resilient a population might be to perturbation by stressors in specific life-stages. We
investigated whether there are patterns between life-history traits and the strength of stage-specific
density-dependence (e.g compensatory, over-compensatory, depensatory) by summarizing published
studies where stage-specific densities varied experimentally or naturally. We quantified the functional
relationship between density and survival for as many species and life-stages as there were data
available by fitting a range of models to the data (e.g. Beverton-Holt, theta-logistic, compensation ratios).
The strength of density-dependence was compared across studies to evaluate correlations with life-
history traits and taxonomic groupings. We summarized 71 papers comprising 105 studies, and found
that 68% were conducted with fewer than 4 densities, the threshold required for fitting relationships
between density and survival. We identified a strong bias in life-history representation among the studies
(primarily larval, pool breeding, and temperate) that restricted the conclusions that could be drawn about
patterns between the strength of density-dependence and life-history traits. Ten studies were suitable for
model-fitting and comparison, and while they represent a limited sub-set of species and life histories, the



                                                                                                         529
strength of density-dependence can be used to evaluate the relative importance of stage-specific
stressors in each case. We conclude that the utility of using a population dynamics framework is currently
limited by the availability of data in the published literature, but propose that ecologists studying
amphibians consider contributing unpublished population and life-history data to centralized online
databases. Such information would accelerate our ability to evaluate threats to potentially even poorly
studied amphibian species, extending the value of individual studies and broadening the scope of
conservation efforts beyond species by species triage.



Orrico, Bill (Wildlife Conservation Society);

Color Recognition in a Captive Juvenile Cuban Crocodile (Crocodylus rhombifer) During
Conditioning

Although the structure of the modern crocodilian eye suggests the ability to see in a broad range of
colors, very little research has been done to understand the ability of crocodilian species to differentiate
between colors in a captive setting. A broader understanding of the visual ability of crocodilians will have
a significant effect on captive crocodilian husbandry primarily relating to modern enrichment and training
techniques employed by captive facilities. Using a juvenile Cuban Crocodile (Crocodylus rhombifer) The
Wildlife Conservation Society‘s Bronx Zoo facility conducted a study of color recognition and decision
making use of the animal‘s previously observed responses to positive reinforcement training. We
presented the animal with a choice between its regularly reinforced color target and a randomized
secondary color target and recorded how long it took for a ―choice‖ to be made. The crocodile showed an
ability to recognize its target, indicating the ability to differentiate between the choices given. This
aptitude to distinguish between different color targets can be very helpful in the husbandry and
conditioning of crocodilians, as well as providing insights into crocodilian cognitive abilities.



Ortega Andrade, Hugo Mauricio (Fundación EcoCiencia and Instituto de Ecología, A.C.); Cisneros-
Heredia, Diego (Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales,
Quito, Columbia)

Twenty-one years supporting research and conservation of threatened species in Ecuador based
on a research fellowship program

EcoCiencia, an Ecuadorian NGO, has developed a research fellowship program to promote conservation
projects in Ecuador since 1990:       Programa de Becas de Investigación para la Conservación        PBIC.
This program focuses on the promotion of biodiversity research and in-situ conservation actions
developed by young Ecuadorian investigators (both students and professionals). Since 2005, in
collaboration with Conservation International and other partner organizations, Ecociencia focused PBIC
on projects related with threaten species (under the ―Fernando Ortíz Crespo‖ Threatened Species
Initiative). So far, about 80 projects have been funded, dealing with several threatened species and their
habitats along continental and insular Ecuador. PBIC and its Threatened Species Initiative has been an
important support to herpetological research, with 13 projects developed by five young Ecuadorian
herpetologists since 2005. These projects have contributed with new information on the systematics,
ecology, population dynamics, biogeography, ethology, conservation status, and disease-related issues
of frogs of the families Centrolenidae (glassfrogs), Hylidae (treefrogs), Dendrobatidae (poison frogs), and
several species of lizards and crocodylians. In particular, for glassfrogs a great deal of information has
been produced, including the description of five new species, a revision of the anatomical and ecological



                                                                                                        530
characteristics of the family, and assessments of the impacts produced by habitat and climate changes
on their populations. Nowadays, EcoCiencia has partnered with Fundación Zoológica del Ecuador to
enhance the Threatened Species Initiative by incorporating into a program that aims to support the
conservation of threatened amphibians by including environmental education, institutional strengthening,
and government lobbying together with research and in-situ conservation. We hope to continue the
support of young scientific talents, and suggest that this program-model should be developed in other
countries.



O'Shea, Owen (Australian Institute of Marine science);

Bioturbation by stingrays at Ningaloo Reef,

Stingrays are an important part of the biomass of the fishes in shallow coastal ecosystems, particularly in
interreefal      areas. In these habitats, they are considered keystone species – modifying physical and
biological habitats through      their foraging and predation. Here, we quantify the effects of bioturbation
by rays on sand flats of Ningaloo Reef lagoon in Western Australia. We measured the daily length,
breadth and depth of 108 feeding pits over three 7-day periods, created by stingrays ( Pastinachus
atrus, Himantura spp. Taeniura lymma and Urogymnus asperrimus) in Mangrove Bay. Additionally, an
area of , 1km 2 of the lagoon at Coral Bay was mapped three times over 18 months, to record patterns
of ray and pit presence. Over 21 days at Mangrove Bay, a total of 1.08m 3 of sediment was excavated
by rays, equating to a sediment wet weight of 760.8 kg, and 2.42% of the total area sampled, or 0.03% of
the whole intertidal zone. We estimate that up to 42% of the soft sediments in our study area would be
reworked by stingrays each year. Based on a model predicting the probability of pit presence over time,
there was a 40% probability of ray pits persisting for 4 days before being filled in but only a 15%
probability of a pit being present after 7 days. Changes in pit volume over time were static, providing
evidence for secondary use. Our results imply that rays play an important ecological role creating
sheltered habitats for other taxa in addition to the turnover of sediments



Oswald, Heather (University of South Carolina); Waldron, Jayme; Welch, Shane (University of South
Carolina, Canada); Bennett, Steve (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada);
Mousseau, Timothy (University of South Carolina, Canada)

Environmental Effects on Southern Two-Lined Salamander (Eurycea cirrigera) Nest Site Selection

Nest site selection is a critical process in the life history of amphibians directly influencing offspring
survival and fitness of the parent. Females use both abiotic (temperature, moisture, and site composition)
and biotic (presence of conspecifics, predators, and competitors) factors as cues to discriminate among
oviposition sites. In this study, we evaluated nest site selection of the Southern Two-lined salamander,
Eurycea cirrigera , in relation to a range of environmental conditions. We monitored nesting E. cirrigera
under coverboards at two seepage wetlands in the South Carolina inner Coastal Plain during the E.
cirrigera breeding season. For each coverboard, we recorded environmental and habitat data. We
analyzed photographs of nesting landscapes under coverboards and egg mass ( n =51) locations using a
GIS. We examined E. cirrigera nest site selection at two scales (seep and within coverboard) using
logistic regression and AIC model selection. We constructed a priori candidate models that included
abiotic and biotic predictors. Within board nest site selection was positively associated with flowing, free
water and negatively associated with distance to board edge. At the seep scale, nest site selection
appeared to be driven by water temperature and depth. Although Coastal Plain seepage wetlands are



                                                                                                        531
radically different from montane E. cirrigera habitats, seepages provide a unique combination of flowing
water and temperature regimes that provide suitable nesting habitats for E. cirrigera within an atypical
landscape.



Ota, Hidetoshi (University of Hyogo and Museum of Nature and Human Activities); Takeuchi, Misato
(University of Hyogo, Canada); Kawamura, Kouichi (Mie University, Canada); Oh, Hong-Shik (Cheju
National University, Canada); Orlov, Nikolai; Ananjeva, Natalia (Institute of Zoology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Canada)

Systematics and biogeography of the soft-shell turtles, Pelodiscus sinensis sensu lato

The soft-shell turtles of the genus Pelodiscus are broadly distributed in East Asia, from southeastern
Russia through Korea and eastern continental China down to northern Vietnam in the eastern Eurasian
Continent, and several off-shore islands, such as Taiwan and the Main islands of Japan. Due to their
popularity as food materials in most East Asian countries, the soft-shell turtles have been artificially
transported, occasionally leading to establishment of feral populations. We have examined molecular
phylogeography of Pelodiscus sinensis sensu lato and related taxa. Our purposes are: (1) To create a
plausible hypothesis on the history of divergence, and natural and artificial dispersals in this group of
turtles in East Asia; and (2) to revise their taxonomic arrangement accordingly. Tissue samples from
approximately 250 specimens, representing nearly whole range of P. sinensis sensu lato and related
taxa, were subjected to sequencing of mitochondrial ND4 gene, and resultant data were subjected to
phylogenetic and network analyses along with additional sequence data available from free data-bases.
The results of the analyses demonstrated complicated genetic structure in several local assemblages of
the turtles, Japanese assemblages in particular, most likely as a result of artificial introduction of exotic
individuals to areas where native populations with unique haplotypes had occurred already. Conservation
implications of the present findings are also discussed.



Otani, Lye (Department of Biological Science - Federal University of São Paulo); Navas Iannini, Carlos
Arturo (Department of Physiology - University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil); Carvalho, José Eduardo
(Department of Biological Science - Federal University of São Paulo, Diadema, Brazil)

Does Exercise Physiology Differ Between Anuran Species From Continuous And Fragmented
Forested Habitats?

Habitat fragmentation is considered one of the main factors associated to amphibian population decline
worldwide. Among the complex causal relationship between these two processes, landscape connectivity
is an important factor for gene flow maintenance and thus important for populations persistence in
fragmented habitats. Therefore, our main hypothesis is that anuran species that are extinct in fragmented
habitats have lower locomotor capacity than persistent species. To test this hypothesis, we compared
morphological, physiological and locomotor performance traits of 3 different anuran species from the
genus Physalaemus and Leptodactylus that occur in continuous and fragmented habitats in two locations
of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. In comparison with the forest specialists Leptodactylus notoakitites and L.
marmoratus, the species L. mystacinus is frequently found in open and fragmented habitats. In contrast
with the congenerics species studied, individuals of L. mystacinus have large body size, high endurance
capacity (i.e. number of jumps, maximal distance jumped and time until exhaustion) and maximum activity
of the metabolic enzymes citrate sintase and lactate dehydrogenase in the hindlimb muscles. It is
possible that such characteristics enable a greater movement among fragments or between fragments




                                                                                                         532
and the breeding sites. A similar pattern, however, could not be identified across populations of the same
species or across species within the genus Physalaemus. Differences among populations of the
fragmented habitat persistent species, Physalaemus cuvieri, seem dependent on the geographic location
and independent of landscape features. Moreover, individuals of P. cuvieri have intermediate body size,
endurance capacity and hindlimb muscles enzyme activity when compared with P. olfersii and P. spiniger,
the forest specialists species studied. Therefore, our hypothesis was corroborated for the genus
Leptodactylus and not for the genus Physalaemus. Our study highlights the importance of the relationship
between physiology, conservation and landscape ecology from the perspective of ability to circulate
across a fragmented forest matrix. However, whereas movement may be a key factor for some taxa,
other aspects such as tolerance to the matrix conditions may be more relevant. Therefore, we emphasize
the importance of an integrative approach to understand the complex relationship between forest habitat
fragmentation and anuran declines.(Financed by FAPESP)



Otero, Luisa (University of Puerto Rico); Huey, Raymond (University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States); Gorman, George (retired, Berkeley, CA, United States)

Habitat influence on annual reproductive cycle of Anolis cristatellus in Puerto Rico

At many Caribbean localities, different species of Anolis occupy open (sunny, hot) versus forest (shady,
cool) habitats [1, 2]. Open-habitat species thermoregulate carefully &amp; have high body temperatures (
T b ); forest species are thermoconformers &amp; have low T b [1, 2]. At some localities, however, a
single species occupies both habitats:, individuals in the open are thermoregulators &amp; relatively
warm, but those in shade are thermoconformers &amp; cool [3, 4].             What are the consequences of
living in thermally distinct habitats? A case in point involves A. cristatellu s, which occupies both open
&amp; forest habitats at Pta Salinas, Puerto Rico [3]. In the morning in summer, open A. cristatellus are
warm &amp; fast relative to forest lizards, but in the afternoon, open lizards are heat stressed &amp;
relatively slow [3]. Whether habitat also influences reproductive intensity &amp; cycles is unknown, but
likely, because temperature drives reproductive cycles in Puerto Rican Anolis [6, 7].      We are studying
female reproductive cycles of A. cristatellus at Pta Salinas. Every month we captured ≥ 15 females in
each habitat and determined reproductive condition. Females with ≥ one egg were classified as gravid [6].
We also recorded size (SVL), body and air temperature, perch height, sun exposure, and weather.            In
both habitats females had highest reproduction in summer and lowest in winter, a cycle typical of Puerto
Rican Anolis [6]. In every month, lizards in the open were warmer and more frequently gravid than were
forest females. Differences in winter months were striking: 37% of open females had eggs (N=70), but no
forest female did (N=57).      To our knowledge, such habitat-scale variation in reproduction at single sites
has not been documented for lizards. In any case, thermal habitat clearly alters reproduction (and
probably demography) of A. cristatellus at Pta Salinas. In particular, the forest appears suboptimal
because forest lizards have reduced reproduction every month. Climate warming might reverse that
disadvantage. [1] Ruibal, R. 1961 Evolution 15:98-111. [2] Rand, A.S. 1964 Ecology 45:745-752. [3]
Huey, R.B. 1974 Science 184:1001-1003. [4] Lister, B.C. 1976 Evolution 30:659-676. [5] Huey, R.B.
1983 In Advances in Herpetology &amp; Evolutionary Biology: Essays in Honor of Ernest E. Williams ,
A.G.J. Rhodin &amp; K. Miyata, Eds. Mus Comp Zool: Cambridge, MA. p. 484-490. [6] Gorman, G.C.
&amp; Licht, P. 1974 Ecology 55:360-369. [7] Licht, P. and Gorman, G.C. 1975 Copeia 1975:496-504.




                                                                                                         533
Owen, Dustin (Ball State University); Jacquemin, Stephen; Doll, Jason; Pyron, Mark; Lauer, Thomas
(Ball State University, Canada)

Age and rate of growth of freshwater drum (Aplodinotus grunniens) in the Wabash River, USA

Understanding age and growth characteristics is a key component of assessing population dynamics,
ecosystem status, and for imploring best management practices. The freshwater drum ( Aplodinotus
grunniens ) is a long lived, highly fecund, benthivore that comprises the largest geographic range of all
North American freshwater fishes. We analyzed otolith cross-sections to assess age and growth patterns
of 460 freshwater drum sampled from the Wabash River, Indiana. Our objective was to evaluate age
and growth patterns in relation to sex, size, position in the river system (upstream vs. downstream of a
large tributary) using the linearized von Bertalanffy growth model. Age ranged from 0 to 32 years and
length ranged from 68mm to 595mm. Growth patterns indicated that males exhibit faster growth rates
than females during the first few years of growth. However, females ultimately attain longer lengths and
display faster growth rates after age two. Position in the river system (upstream vs. downstream) was not
related to growth rates of either sex. We suggest that differences in growth rate may be attributable to diet
and sexual maturity energy cost. In addition, we suggest that overall rates of growth have been influenced
by hydrology and ecosystem processes.



Owen, Dustin (Ball State University); Islam, Kamal (Ball State University, Canada)

Physiological Impacts of Roads on Free-Ranging Copperheads (Agkistrodon contortrix)

Chronic stress has been linked to impaired reproduction, suppressed immunity, and neural cell death in
many vertebrate species.          While numerous studies have been conducted on birds and mammals,
comparatively few studies have been undertaken on reptiles. This paucity of data effectively limits the
capacity for and direction of potential conservation efforts. This project will implement a novel approach
for investigating whether anthropogenic disturbances influences the stress physiology in free-ranging
copperheads ( Agkistrodon contortrix ). The ecology and behavioral aspects of copperheads have been
extensively studied; their physiological reactions however, when exposed to road obstructions remain
undocumented. For 3 months (May, June, and July) in 2012, snakes will be captured from 3 study sites,
Yellowwood and Clark state forests, and Brown County State Park in southern Indiana. A control group
of snakes captured from nearby natural areas (found by walking within the area at least 100 m away from
the road), and a treatment group of snakes captured while crossing, attempting to cross, or have just
recently crossed a road will be collected.       Blood will be drawn and analyzed using an ELISA CORT
assay kit. There is a growing need to understand that, in addition to visible impacts (behavioral and
ecological) of the organism in response to human alterations of habitat, invisible effects (physiological)
may be equally important. A review of the literature indicates this is the first study to address this issue.
I will present data that will examine if crossing roads causes stress in snakes and thus, may offer a
physiological explanation for previously documented cases of roads as barriers to gene flow.             The
ramifications of this study should shed light onto the ever growing field of anthropogenic studies on
wildlife, but will take a new approach in observing the physiological impacts rather than behavioral. The
results of this study will provide a better understanding of roads as chronic stressors.




                                                                                                         534
Owens, Hannah (University of Kansas);

Niche Conservatism in Gadine Fishes

Niche conservatism, the tendency of the fundamental niche of a species to remain the same over time, is
a growing area of interest in a number of organismal groups. This study aims to test the hypothesis that
niche conservatism has led to a negative correlation between phylogenetic relatedness and niche
similarity in the subfamily Gadinae. The Gadinae is a group of marine fish that includes Atlantic, Pacific,
and walleye cod ( Gadus morhua, G. macrocephalus , and Theragra chalcogramma, respectively), as
well as Greenland, Polar, Arctic, and East Siberian cod ( G. ogac , Boreogadus saida, Artogadus
glacialis, and A. borisovi ), haddock ( Melanogrammus aeglefinus ) and whiting ( Merlangius merlangus).
These species are distributed throughout the Arctic and subarctic and occupy niches ranging from the
temperate benthos to the edges of Arctic sea ice; some sister species exist in close distributional
proximity, and others are geographically isolated. As a result of their economic importance, many of these
species are very well known and sampled throughout their ranges, resulting in a wealth of available
genetic and geographic information, and providing an ideal system in which to investigate patterns of
niche conservatism. Employing molecular phylogenetic data from GenBank, genetic similarity was
determined by calculating patristic differences between species based on several mitochondrial gene
trees, as well as a concatenated gene tree. Occurrence data from the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility database and the Russian Academy of Sciences Zoological Institute, in combination with
environmental data from NOAA‘s World Ocean Atlas 2009, were used to calculate ecological niche
similarity using both the niche overlap and background similarity tests provided by ENMTools. Resulting
patterns of niche similarity and genetic relatedness of species were complex, although allopatric sister
species tended to display a lesser degree of niche similarity to one another compared to sympatric
species. Although these results were born out by both niche overlap and background similarity tests, they
emphasize the great care that is necessary when attempting such a niche similarity analysis, from the
conception of the distributional range of a species through the interpretation of results.



Oyamaguchi, Hilton (UCLA); Smith, Thomas (UCLA, Los Angeles, United States)

Divergence along a Brazilian rainforest-savanna gradient and the role in generating diversity

Although a growing number of studies have shown that ecological speciation may be common, previous
work has largely used vicariant events to explain patterns of diversity in the Amazon rainforest. Evaluating
the relative roles of genetic drift and divergent selection is fundamental to understanding the mechanisms
of rainforest speciation, yet few studies have simultaneously examined these processes. Our research
investigates the relative roles of natural selection and genetic drift resulting in differentiation in the frog
Dendropsophus minutus examining populations from the Amazon rainforest and the Brazilian savanna
(Cerrado). Environmental differences between these habitats may result in contrasting selection
pressures and may, as a consequence, be important in speciation. To understand the effects of divergent
selection and genetic drift on intraspecific differentiation in D. minutus populations, we analyzed museum
and field data from both habitats. Multivariate analysis (PCA) of morphological data from museum
collections shows significant differences between habitats. Similar to museum specimens, PCA analyses
of morphological data collected in the field shows significant differences between Cerrado and
Amazonian populations. In addition, D. minutus calls show differences between these two habitats.
Finally, morphology analyses show that the divergence between habitat types is greater than within
habitat comparisons. This result suggests that natural selection along the gradient might be important in
generating intraspecific divergence between populations. This study demonstrates that the Amazon




                                                                                                           535
forest-Cerrado gradient may play an important role in the speciation process; and may have important
implications for conservation decision makers in this region.



Pabijan, Maciej (Jagiellonian University); Wollenberg, Katharina (Trier University, Trier, Germany);
Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany)

The influence of body size on diversification in anurans: a case study from Madagascar

The processes affecting species diversification may also exert an influence on patterns of genetic
variability within species. We evaluated the contributions of five potential explanatory variables affecting
rates of species formation (body size, reproductive mode, range size, microhabitat and skin texture) on
nucleotide divergence between populations and polymorphism within populations in the mitochondrial
16S rRNA gene for 40 species of frogs (Mantellidae) from two rainforest communities in Madagascar. We
find that with the exception of body size, none of the proposed factors correlate with regional
differentiation or levels of genetic variation within populations of mantellid frogs. However, we detected a
significant but weak (ca. 11% of the explained variation in nucleotide divergence) inverse relationship
between body size and divergence between populations, and in most cases a complete lack of haplotype
sharing between populations of small-bodied species. This implies considerable population subdivision
and low levels of gene flow in small and medium sized frogs. Lower vagility and shorter generation times,
both putatively associated with small body size, are hypothesized to be the proximate mechanisms
producing this pattern. The biological correlates of small body size may thus establish a basis for regional
genetic fragmentation, which in turn may accelerate rates of allopatric speciation in small-bodied frogs
relative to large species. Our results are corroborated by a recent phylogeny-based study in mantellids
that found a link between small body size and higher mtDNA substitution rates. Taken together, our
findings suggest a mechanism through which variation in body size might influence species formation and
thus has important implications for diversification rates in tropical amphibians and possibly other
vertebrate groups.



Page, Larry (Florida Museum of Natural History);

iDigBio, the National Resource for Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC)

iDigBio, the National Resource for the NSF-funded "Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections" is
working to build the teams and infrastructure that are required to successfully digitize information in
biological collections throughout the U.S. iDigBio will provide core resources and coordination for the
national digitization effort, oversee implementation of standards and best practices for digitization, provide
a cloud computing environment for collections data, and plan for long-term sustainability of the national
digitization effort. As the national repository grows, iDigBio will work to improve the understanding and
appreciation of biodiversity, and of the collections that document biodiversity, by demonstrating the
connection between biodiversity and scientific and societal benefits.




                                                                                                          536
Palen, Wendy (Earth to Ocean Research Group, Dept. of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University);
Monteith, Zachary; Munshaw, Robin; Courcelles, Danielle; Atlas, William (Earth to Ocean Research
Group, Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Canada)

Ecological roles and population dynamics of Dicamptodon tenebrosus in stream ecosystems

In tributaries of the Pacific Northwest, coastal giant salamanders ( Dicamptodon tenebrosus ) often co-
occur at high densities with steelhead trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) and are top aquatic predators in
many stream food webs. Nearly two decades of research has demonstrated the primacy of predation by
stream-dwelling fishes in structuring stream food webs. Despite achieving body sizes and total biomass
that can exceed that of fishes in many streams, the role of salamanders in these systems has received far
less attention. Over the past three years we combined experiments of stream food webs with surveys,
mark-recapture studies, and population dynamics models to estimate the strength of trophic interactions
and nutrient recycling by juvenile steelhead and coastal giant salamanders. Here we synthesize the
results of these diverse approaches to present an overview of the ecological roles and population
dynamics of D. tenebrosus in stream ecosystems. We find that the density and total biomass of stream
vertebrates is often strongly skewed, with D. tenebrosus biomass more than three times that of all
juvenile salmonids. Despite these differences, we estimate that the total amount of consumer recycled
nutrients (N, P) is dominated by juvenile steelhead (2x higher TN, 1.3x higher TP). Field-based
experiments in small tributaries where both species coexist suggest that terrestrial invertebrates directly
subsidize juvenile steelhead, constituting approximately 50% of prey biomass, but represent only a small
fraction of coastal giant salamander diets (&lt;10%). When terrestrial prey was experimentally reduced
over summer months, we found no changes in salamander growth rates but dramatic reductions in
steelhead growth. These patterns of resource use are supported by stable isotope samples from streams
containing both species, with D. tenebrosus populations deriving energy from more aquatic (algal)
sources (δ 13 C -25.5) compared to juvenile steelhead (δ 13 C -24.2). Despite the potential for release
from resource competition, we find that D. tenebrosus in streams without salmonids experience slower
growth rates, and using stochastic population dynamics models, estimate that these differences in growth
translate into smaller salamander populations that have a higher probability of extinction over a simulated
30-year time horizon. We conclude that anthropogenic changes in the relative abundance of coastal giant
salamanders and juvenile steelhead have the potential to alter stream food web dynamics and ecosystem
level nutrient availability.



Palmeri-Miles, Amber (Central Washington University); Irwin, Jason (Central Washington University,
Canada); Griswold, Trish; Browitt, Lisa (Walter Strom Middle School, Canada)

Middle School Students Conduct Conservation Research by Tracking Toads

Sixth, seventh, and eighth-grade students from Walter Strom Middle School in Cle Elum, Washington,
were an integral part of a Master‘s of Science project at Central Washington University (CWU) examining
movement patterns and home ranges of Western Toads ( Anaxyrus boreas ) near Snoqualmie Pass, WA
(USA). Students who participated in the ―Watershed Club‖ as part of CWU‘s Yakima WATERS program
(funded by a National Science Foundation GK-12 grant) had the opportunity to conduct fieldwork and
collect real data. These students learned to use Telonics TR-4 and Communication Specialist Inc. R1000
receivers with a Telonics RA-14 directional antenna to track Western Toads. Toads were outfitted with
radio transmitters (BD-2 or BD-2T Holohil Inc.) mounted on waist belts made of polyethylene tubing.
Approximately once a month, active participants in the Watershed Club were selected to conduct
fieldwork. These students used radio telemetry to locate toads in various habitats throughout three




                                                                                                       537
seasons in all weather conditions. Western Toads show great capacity for movement (e.g., &gt;3.5 km in
a week), use a wide variety of habitats, and show strong seasonal and annual site fidelity. Estimates of
Western Toads‘ home ranges were 0.002-1.346 km2 (n= 10). Due to the duration of this study (2 yr)
students were able to observe differences in seasonal habitat selection and movement patterns. In
addition to collecting data, students were filmed and interviewed while conducting fieldwork. A
documentary is being assembled that will be used to educate community members about the importance
of wildlife conservation and demonstrate Walter Strom Middle School‘s connection with local
environmental issues.



Palmeri-Miles, Amber (Central Washington University); Irwin, Jason (Central Washington University,
Canada)

Western Toad (Anaxyrus boreas) overwintering and hibernacula temperatures near Snoqualmie
Pass, WA, USA

Amphibians use a variety of methods to survive harsh winter temperatures. Some avoid freezing
temperatures by overwintering aquatically; others are freeze tolerant, and some species use
subterranean refuges. Because Western Toads ( Anaxyrus [= Bufo ] boreas ) are not freeze tolerant,
overwintering sites must buffer toads from freezing temperatures, although few studies have examined
overwintering in this species. We investigated the timing of A. boreas overwintering and movements
around overwintering sites, identified and described hibernacula, and measured temperatures
experienced by overwintering toads. Twelve A. boreas were radio tracked to hibernacula in 2009 and
2010 in the Snoqualmie Pass area of the Cascade Mountains of Washington State (USA). This area is
characterized by heavy snowfall (mean= 11 m annually) and snow is often present when toads breed in
mid-April to mid-May (weather dependent). Toads entered hibernacula between 5 October and 20
November. Spring emergence was more variable, ranging from 11 March and 1 June. Some toads made
distinct movements from summer foraging range to overwintering sites (0.074-2.3 km), while others
overwintered within their summer range. Distance moved to overwintering sites was not correlated with
size or sex. Hibernacula sites were located in a variety of habitats ranging from wetlands to upland
forests. Most toads selected pre-existing burrows and natural tunnels often adjacent to subsurface
streams, although others appeared to have burrowed directly into the soil. Communal overwintering (at
least 2 individuals) was observed at two sites. The two largest males and females were outfitted with
Thermochron iButton (DS1922L) attached to radio transmitter belts. Radio transmitter-iButton complexes
weighed 7.0-7.5 g (4.0-8.6% of body weight). To record environmental temperatures, additional iButtons
were placed at the entrances of hibernacula, and in nearby trees (2 m height). iButtons recorded
temperatures at 1.2 or 1.5 h intervals. The minimum temperature recorded amongst hibernacula was
0.13°C, although air temperatures reached -20.8°C. Toads‘ temperature data indicate that they emerge
from hibernacula, bask in the sun and retreat below ground before traveling away from overwintering
sites. A. boreas overwintering seems highly variable. Some toads traveled towards breeding sites to
overwinter, others overwintered within their summer range then traveled to breeding sites, yet other
mature adults did not breed at all.




                                                                                                     538
Palomares, M.L. Deng (Fisheries Centre, UBC); Bailly, Nicolas (WorldFish Center, Canada)

Documenting the marine biodiversity of island ecosystems through FishBase and SeaLifeBase

FishBase (www.fishbase.org) and SeaLifeBase (www.sealifebase.org), free-access online biodiversity
information systems on fish and other marine animals of the world, collate bits of data from published
sources into a structure that was originally designed to provide data for analyses by aquatic resource
scientists and managers. These two databases jointly have the potential to give a full coverage of the
marine life of the world‘s oceans and can become a strong ecosystem management tool, especially for
well-documented ecosystems. Both databases use valid species (scientific) names as the hook to all
information and are designed to provide checklists of species by locality, i.e., by ecosystem within a
country, by country, or by large marine ecosystem. Checklists contain, in addition to valid and nominal
species, common names used in several languages, the status of the species in that locality, where it is
found within the water column, and its largest recorded maximum length. Attached to each valid scientific
name is a suite of structured diagnostic and ecological data that characterize the species in general,
along with population-specific biological data (e.g., growth parameters, length-weight relationships, food
items, predators, details on spawning and reproduction, etc.). This suite of data represents the bulk of
information needed for an ecosystem approach to the management of exploited living marine resources
or the assessment of the biological and economic impacts of large marine ecosystems, as done, e.g., by
the Sea Around Us project. This contribution describes the process of this documentation exemplified
with checklists of marine vertebrates in island ecosystems. We also discuss a mechanism for the efficient
transfer of pertinent data to and from projects requiring the wide range of data stored in these two
information systems, e.g., for building Ecopath models.



Paluh, Daniel (John Carroll University); Saporito, Ralph (John Carroll University, Canada)

An experimental test of aposematism in the dendrobatid poison frog Oophaga pumilio using
moving clay models

Brightly colored frogs of the family Dendrobatidae contain alkaloid-based chemical defenses, which
appear to be utilized as an effective deterrent to predators. The conspicuous coloration of these frogs is
generally considered an aposematic signal to potential color-visioned predators. A previous field-based
experiment tested this hypothesis using stationary red clay model frogs and brown clay model frogs to
assess the natural predation rates of the dendrobatid frog Oophaga pumilio as a function of color at the
La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Predation rates on brown models were almost twice that of red
models, suggesting that predators avoided the brightly colored models. These results support the
hypothesis that coloration in O. pumilio is an aposematic signal. In the present study, we utilize similar
methods to further study aposematism in O. pumilio. Herein, we report the results of a field study in which
natural predation rates were measured for moving clay models of O. pumilio and brown frogs. Stationary
models may not provide realistic assessments of natural predation rates, as predators may be
‗suspicious‘ or not perceive motionless models as prey, and thus avoid attacking the models. Moving
models are likely to be more realistic, and therefore provide a better assessment of natural predator
responses. The results of our study will provide additional information on the function of aposematic
coloration in dendrobatid frogs.




                                                                                                       539
Park, Daesik (Kangwon National University); Kim, Ja-Kyeong (Kangwon National University, Chuncheon,
Kangwon, Korea)

Arginine vasotocin (AVT) induces the courtship behavior of male Hynobius leechii (Urodela,
Amphibia) without external stimuli

In Hynobius , the body undulation, a male stiffens his body intermittently so that his tail and the hind part
of this body move from side to side, is one of representative male courtship behaviors and both males
and females respond to the behavior via the mechanosensory system. During a mating, a male often
displays more than 100 times body undulation per 10 min over 2-4 hours. A recent study showed that
water currents generated by male body undulations function to attract females towards the site where she
can attach her egg sacs and also in male-male competition. In this study, we have investigated if arginine
vasotocin (AVT) induces the body undulation of male Hynobius leechii as it similarly functioned in
Cynops pyrrhogaster and Taricha granulosa and if it is, tried to determine which AVT receptor is
involved in the response. Breeding and non-breeding males intraperitoneally injected 100 ug AVT started
within approximately 10 min and highly, actively displayed the body undulation where any external stimuli
were not present. In a long-term study of the response, the effect by AVT persisted over 4 hours. When
injected 100 ug AVT 20 min after injection of AVT V1 receptor antagonist to the males, the frequency of
the body undulation was decreased. However, the suppressive effect by AVT V1 receptor antagonist was
not distinct when the males which were injected the AVT V1 receptor antagonist were allowed to interact
with a female. Injection of AVT V2 receptor antagonist did not induce any significant changes in the male
body undulation. Our results suggest that in this species, AVT might influence central motivational states
of male salamanders to start their body undulation unlikely known in other urodele species and the effect
is evoked through AVT V1 receptors. This study is supported by Kangwon National University.



Parker, Mickey (University of Arizona); Goode, Matt; Albert, Kristin (University of Arizona, Canada)

Using Fluorescent Powder Tracking to Observe Fine-Scale Movements of Gila Monsters
(Heloderma suspectum)

Radiotelemetry is a useful technique that can yield valuable data on the movement paths of animals,
especially secretive species. Despite its advantages, radiotelemetry yields no information regarding
movement paths and behaviors between successive relocations. However, fluorescent powder tracking
is a technique that can be used to observe such fine-scale movements. This technique involves applying
fluorescent powder to an individual, allowing it to move about its environment, and following the resulting
trail with a portable source of UV light. From 2008-2010, we used fluorescent powder tracking to observe
fine scale movements of Gila Monsters (Heloderma suspectum) in and around Stone Canyon, a
residential development in the foothills of the Tortolita Mountains near Tucson, AZ, USA. Stone Canyon
is a mosaic of land-use types, including natural and grazed Sonoran Desert habitat, an 18-hole golf
course surrounded by areas of highly irrigated desert vegetation, houses in various stages of
construction, and a network of roads. Because Gila Monsters have large home ranges and are capable
of moving hundreds of meters in a single bout of surface activity, they are very likely to encounter
anthropogenic landscape features as they move through Stone Canyon‘s urban matrix. Using fluorescent
powder tracking, we recorded the movement paths of 121 individual Gila Monsters and recorded them
using handheld GPS units. We found that the average total distance of these paths were over twice that
of their straight line distance, which has important implications for this species‘ behavioral and
physiological ecology. We will discuss characteristics of these movement paths, as well as behaviors we
were able to document using this technique that would not be possible using other methods. We will also




                                                                                                         540
discuss the conservation implications of our results as they pertain to making urban developments more
compatible with wildlife.



Parker, Scott (Coastal Carolina University); Murphy, Christopher (The University of Sydey, Canada);
Thompson, Michael (The University of Sydney, Canada)

Influence of the progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone on uterine blood vessel
development and epithelial surface morphology in oviparous and viviparous Australian skinks

Many of the structural and functional changes to the uterus associated with maintenance of pregnancy
are controlled by steroid hormones such as progesterone. We tested the hypothesis that progesterone
regulates uterine blood vessel development and epithelial surface morphology in the oviparous skink
Ctenotus taeniolatus and the viviparous skink Eulamprus quoyii by treating females with the
progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone at different stages of gestation. We used
immunofluorescent confocal microscopy and scanning electron microscopy to quantify uterine vascularity
and to describe uterine surface morphology during gestation. Overall, mifepristone treatment resulted in
increased uterine blood vessel proliferation in in C. taeniolatus but did not affect uterine vascular density
and surface area at any stage of pregnancy in E. quoyii . In contrast, there was no apparent effect of
mifepristone treatment on uterine epithelial surface morphology during gestation in gravid/ pregnant
females of either species. Both species exhibit distinct regionalization in shape of uterine epithelial cells
which may relate to different functional roles during gestation. Our comparative studies of these and
other species of Australian skinks suggest that differences in uterine sensitivity to progesterone during
gravidity/pregnancy may exist among species. Alternatively, variation in progesterone receptor amino
acid sequence could result in failure of mifepristone to effectively block binding of progesterone to its
receptor and thus account for differences in treatment effects observed among skink species.



Parkinson, Chris (University of Central Florida); Fenwick, Allyson (Univeristy of Central Florida,
Canada); Daza, Juan M. (Universidad de Antioquia, Canada)

Systematics, taxonomy and biogeography of New World pitvipers (Serpentes: Crotalinae)

Understanding the historical processes that have shaped the evolution of biotic assemblages is an
important aspect of evolutionary biology. An excellent, well-defined, model system for investigating
historical processes is New World pitvipers. These snakes, characterized by a distinct facial pit, are of
interest to several biological fields due to their medical and ecological importance. Resolving the
evolutionary relationships of the group is paramount as it informs an understanding of the evolution of
venom proteins and composition as well as the evolution of phenotype, behavior, natural history,
geographic range, and other aspects of pitviper biology. A taxonomy that differentiates distinct
evolutionary lineages facilitates communication on group members, as species binomials are the most
broadly utilized result of systematists‘ classifications. Because of long interest in pitvipers multiple
morphological and mitochondrial phylogenies have been generated, but taxon-comprehensive trees are
still lacking and key intra- and intergeneric relationships are still unclear. We generate the most taxon-
comprehensive phylogenies of New World pitvipers to date (N=114), evaluating 93% of currently-
recognized species through combining morphological (~100) and molecular (~4700) characters. We use
parsimony and model-based approaches to infer phylogeny and interpret the relationships in light of
geological and climatic events. Results indicate that numerous geological and biogeographic boundaries
have played a role in shaping pitviper diversity in the New World.Understanding the historical processes



                                                                                                         541
that have shaped the evolution of biotic assemblages is an important aspect of evolutionary biology. An
excellent, well-defined, model system for investigating historical processes is New World pitvipers. These
snakes, characterized by a distinct facial pit, are of interest to several biological fields due to their
medical and ecological importance. Resolving the evolutionary relationships of the group is paramount as
it informs an understanding of the evolution of venom proteins and composition as well as the evolution of
phenotype, behavior, natural history, geographic range, and other aspects of pitviper biology. A taxonomy
that differentiates distinct evolutionary lineages facilitates communication on group members, as species
binomials are the most broadly utilized result of systematists‘ classifications. Because of long interest in
pitvipers multiple morphological and mitochondrial phylogenies have been generated, but taxon-
comprehensive trees are still lacking and key intra- and intergeneric relationships are still unclear. We
generate the most taxon-comprehensive phylogenies of New World pitvipers to date (N=114), evaluating
93% of currently-recognized species through combining morphological (~100) and molecular (~4700)
characters. We use parsimony and model-based approaches to infer phylogeny and interpret the
relationships in light of geological and climatic events. Results indicate that numerous geological and
biogeographic boundaries have played a role in shaping pitviper diversity in the New World.



Passerotti, Michelle (NOAA/NMFS); Andrews, Allen (NOAA/NMFS, Aiea, HI, United States); Carlson,
John (NOAA/NMFS, Panama City, FL, United States); Wintner, Sabine (KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board,
Umhlanga Rocks, South Africa); Natanson, Lisa (NOAA/NMFS, Narragansett, RI, United States)

Age validation in sand tiger shark, Carcharias taurus, using bomb radiocarbon analysis

There is a great deal of ambiguity in the age and growth data of sand tiger shark (Carcharias taurus). Of
particular concern is the observed maximum age based on vertebral band counts. To address this
uncertainty, archival vertebrae of sand tiger sharks from both the north Atlantic and south Indian Oceans
were processed for bomb radiocarbon analysis in an effort to validate growth band periodicity and
longevity in the species. Vertebral centra from 10 individuals were chosen for analysis based on capture
date and size at capture, and sectioned to a thickness of 2mm using an Isomet low speed saw. One half
of the section was left at this thickness and mounted for micromilling, while the other half was sanded to a
thickness of 0.5mm and mounted for ageing. Age estimates for each shark were obtained by counting
growth band-pairs assuming annual band-pair deposition, and were used in conjunction with date of
capture to assign a year of formation for each band-pair. Thin sections were used to guide marking of
band-pairs on thick sections. A total of 36 growth band-pairs were milled from thick sections (n= 2 to 6 per
vertebrae) for Δ14C/δ13C analysis. The measured Δ14C values for band-pairs/formation years will be
compared with regional Δ14C reference chronologies including known-age porbeagle shark (Lamna
nasus) and hermatypic corals. This comparison will either validate age estimates or will provide evidence
for discrepancies in age from growth band counting. New estimates of age at maturity and longevity will
be used to update the productivity for this species, which current data estimates to be strikingly low (i.e.
population growth rates are negative) even in the absence of fishing pressure.



Pasukonis, Andrius (Universitaet Wien); Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Canada)

Homing behavior in territorial dendrobatoid frog Allobates femoralis

Dendrobatoid frogs exhibit some of the most complex spatial behavior of the amphibian world, such as
territoriality and tadpole transportation from terrestrial clutches to widely distributed deposition sites. High
homing performance of tadpole transporting adults is often assumed, but experimental evidence is



                                                                                                            542
lacking. Allobates femoralis is a common neotropical leaf litter frog. Males occupy vocally advertised
territories, which are used for oviposition by females. Tadpoles are later transported by males to aquatic
deposition sites, which are located tens to hundreds of meters away from the territory. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that artificially displaced males successfully home back to their territories from as far
as 300 meters within just a few days. To quantify the homing success and speed of A. femoralis, we
conducted a field translocation experiment. Multiple territorial males were displaced up to 800 meters and
their initial capture sites were revisited daily. Individually unique belly patterns allowed the identification of
recaptured males. We question if senses that are most familiar to humans, such as vision, hearing, or
olfaction alone can explain successful homing at this scale.



Paszkowski, Cynthia (University of Alberta);

Herpetological Conservation on Canadian Landscapes Altered by Industry

Industries based on the extraction of renewable and nonrenewable natural resources have long been
fundamental to the Canadian economy. Agriculture, forestry, hard rock mining, hydropower generation,
oil and gas extraction can have profound and lasting effects on terrestrial and freshwater habitats used by
amphibian and reptile species. The application of systems designed to classify and calculate threats
offers a promising approach for assessing the potential impact of industrial activities on individual species
over a broad geographical area, for example, at the provincial level. Integrated landscape management,
which recognizes the combined effects of multiple industries, offers a promising approach for conserving
multiple species simultaneously on a smaller, but still regional, scale.       Meaningful conservation of
individual populations of amphibians and reptiles on industrial landscapes often requires a mix of habitat
preservation, restoration, and creation. For many species, a lack of knowledge of their basic biology in
Canada still remains among the biggest threats to their persistence on landscapes shaped by resource-
based industries.



Pauly, Greg (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County); Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of
California, Los Angeles, Canada)

Phylogenetic relationships and species boundaries among the musk turtles, with a focus on the
federally threatened Flattened Musk Turtle, Sternotherus depressus

The musk turtles include three largely allopatric species in the southeastern United States as well as the
more widespread common stinkpot, Sternotherus odoratus . Of particular note is the federally
threatened Flattened Musk Turtle, Sternotherus depressus , an endemic to the Black Warrior River
System of Alabama and whose range is completely encircled by that of the Stripe-necked Musk Turtle,
Sternotherus minor peltifer . Since its description as a distinct species in 1955, the Flattened Musk Turtle
has been treated both as a distinct species and as a subspecies of S. minor . Further, hybridization with
S. minor , possibly resulting from damn construction and habitat modification, has been suggested as one
potential threat to S. depressus . Here, we examine species boundaries and phylogenetic relationships
among Sternotherus species through analyses of nine nuclear and two mitochondrial genes. All
analyses strongly argue that S. depressus is a unique, strongly differentiated lineage that is well
deserving of species status. However, hybridization has been important in the history of this lineage with
evidence of both ancient and more recent hybridization. The former is suggested by discordant
mitochondrial and nuclear gene trees which mirror previous conflicts between allozyme and mitochondrial
DNA analyses. More recent hybridization is suggested between S. depressus and S. minor , and we



                                                                                                              543
examine whether this gene flow results from ongoing hybridization or recent historical processes. Lastly,
we consider evidence for recognizing S. m. minor and S. m. peltifer as distinct species.



Payne, Samantha (University of Guelph); Petrik, Jim; Vickaryous, Matthew (University of Guelph,
Guelph, ON, Canada)

Angiogenesis during tail regeneration: an investigation using the leopard gecko (Eublepharis
macularius)

As for many lizards, leopard geckos can self-shed (autotomize) their tails as an anti-predation strategy
and spontaneously regenerate a replacement. The regenerate tail forms from an aggregation of
proliferating, mesenchymal-like cells termed the blastema. Cells of the blastema ultimately give rise to
the replacement appendage, a multi-tissue structure including nerves, skeletal muscle and blood vessels.
To date, the role of angiogenesis during regeneration is poorly understood and limited to studies of
zebrafish and urodeles. We investigated angiogenesis throughout the process of tail regeneration in the
leopard gecko using a panel of common angiogenic markers including vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), and cluster differentiation 36
(CD36). The sequence of protein expression during regeneration corresponds with that observed during
embryonic angiogenesis. Early during regeneration, VEGF expression is widespread among cells of the
blastema, including endothelial cells of the newly sprouted capillaries. Maturation of these vessels is
characterized by the appearance of α-SMA immunopositive pericytes. As regeneration progresses,
tissues begin to differentiate and the once diffuse expression of VEGF becomes localized to blood
vessels. TSP-1 and its receptor CD36 are not expressed until the late stages of tail regeneration,
corresponding with the complete differentiation of tail tissues. Overall the organization and relative
distribution of blood vessels in the regenerate tail is comparable but not identical to that of the original
(e.g., the caudal artery of the original tail is replaced by one or more smaller vessels). To further explore
the role of TSP-1 during regeneration we administered a TSP-1 mimetic (the angiogenic compound ABT-
510) to late stage tail regenerating geckos. Our data indicates that the TSP-1 mimetic alters the
distribution and architecture of newly formed blood vessels. Our work suggests that angiogenesis has a
critical role in tail regeneration in the leopard gecko.



Paz, Andrea (Universidad de los Andes); Ibáñez, Roberto (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute,
Canada); Lips, Karen R. (University of Maryland, Canada); Crawford, Andrew J. (Universidad de los
Andes, Bogotá, Columbia)

Testing the role of ecology and life history in structuring genetic variation across a landscape: A
comparative ecophylogeographic approach

Traditional hypotheses to explain phylogeographic structure and species diversity such as rivers,
mountains and refugia often fail to constitute general explanations for observed patterns, especially in
lower latitudes. Limits to dispersal may vary in strength according to organisms‘ intrinsic biology.
Ecological and life history variables may thus be important in explaining the observed patterns of genetic
variation. Amphibians are particularly tied to their environment and have a wide variety of life history
characteristics that may influence their ability to disperse or survive in novel environments.
Phylogeographic studies of Central American amphibians have revealed a variety of historical patterns
with little commonality among species. We developed a novel approach to elucidate the role of life history
variation in generating phylogeographic structure that may be a precursor to species formation. We



                                                                                                         544
sampled three amphibian communities in Panama. We employed DNA barcode data, the mitochondrial
genes COI and 16S, to quantify genetic variation among sites in 31 anuran species. To evaluate
congruence in divergence times between species we used HABC analyses in two comparisons between
the three localities in Panama. Simultaneous divergence between all species was rejected in both cases
however, congruence in divergence times between groups of species was found. We generated
ecological niche models for each species to estimate landscape resistance between localities. Ecological
and life history variables were used to evaluate their importance in explaining the observed genetic
divergence and congruence in divergence times. Preliminary results suggest that landscape resistance is
important in explaining genetic variation. The value of environmental factors in generating
phylogeographic structure and species diversity may thus be greater than usually thought and may
provide a more general explanation than physical barriers for the genetic patterns we observe.



Pearson, Marianne (University College London and The Natural History Museum);

Biogeographical history and radiation of early salamanders: A review

Living salamanders are represented by over 580 species within ten families, and are commonly found in
the Northern Hemisphere. Within this diverse and abundant clade of lissamphibians only two relatively
recent southward migrations into South America and Africa have been documented. The earliest
recorded fossil salamanders date from the Middle Jurassic (165 million years ago) and are known from
both Europe and Asia, with North American records beginning in the Late Jurassic. This distribution has
lead many workers to suggest a Laurasian origin for this group. However, discoveries of enigmatic
Cretaceous and Palaeogene salamander fossils in Bolivia, Sudan and Niger raise questions as to how
they might have arrived on the historically Gondwanan continents, and whether early salamanders, like
frogs, might once have had a more global distribution. After more than a century of morphological and
molecular analysis, some degree of consensus has been reached regarding the interrelationships of living
salamanders, although the position of some clades (e.g. sirenids) still remains controversial, in part
because of widely prevalent paedomorphosis. Incorporating fossil taxa into the phylogeny is more difficult,
but is crucial for an understanding of early salamander radiation and biogeography. Most fossil
salamander remains are incomplete but the discovery of exceptionally well preserved material from the
Late Jurassic/Early Cretaceous of China and Spain offers the potential for more rigorous phylogenetic
analysis.



Pearson, Monica (University of British Columbia); Mooney, P. (R.P. Bio, Canada)

Spotties vs. Bullies: Differentiation of Microhabitat Selection by Endangered Oregon Spotted
Frogs and Invasive American Bullfrogs in Shallow Water Wetland Habitats.

The Oregon Spotted Frog ( Rana pretiosa ) is a critically endangered species in Canada. Reintroduction
into historic and new habitats is essential for the survival and recovery of this species. However,
American bullfrog ( Lithobates catesbianus ) introductions to remnant Oregon spotted frog habitats have
been proposed as a direct cause of local extinctions, as both species are highly aquatic and bullfrogs are
known as aggressive predators of less sizeable frogs. Bullfrogs now exist across approximately 90% of
the historic Oregon spotted frog range in BC, and bullfrog control efforts have been largely ineffective. As
both Oregon spotted frog and bullfrogs prefer shallow warm slow-moving wetland habitats,
reintroductions of Oregon spotted frogs to areas with bullfrog presence must consider habitat selection of
both species, and restoration efforts must seek to provide appropriate habitat for Oregon spotted frogs



                                                                                                        545
while deterring high density colonization by invasive bullfrogs. Our paper describes a research project
that used radio-telemetry to identify and differentiate microhabitat selection of both Oregon spotted frogs
and bullfrogs in a shared habitat, and developed criteria for habitat modification and creation. Fifteen
adult Oregon spotted frogs and fourteen adult bullfrogs were tracked from June through September 2011
and microhabitat variables were measured at each frog location. Multivariate analyses were applied to
identify structural habitat variables significant to each species, and to contrast habitat selection between
species. In addition, microhabitat variables were measured across the wetland, which had been stratified
into habitat typologies through orthophoto analysis. Cluster analysis was used to confirm categorical
habitat typologies, and assess selection by frog species. Adults of the two species used different habitat
typologies, with endangered Oregon spotted frogs using shallower and more structurally complex sites
than the bullfrogs. Adult bullfrogs almost exclusively used deeper water with a low density of emergent
islands or hummocks and dominated by rooted floating vegetation. Habitat alterations to reduce bullfrog
densities should include water level controls that maintain depths that promote islands of clumped
emergent vegetation rather than rooted floating vegetation. Habitats designed to benefit Oregon spotted
frogs should provide a shallow yet complex topology with a high density of vegetation clumps and leafy
emergents. This project will inform the Canadian Oregon Spotted Frog Recovery Team‘s efforts to restore
Oregon spotted frog populations across its historic range in BC‘s Lower Mainland Region.



Pearson, Steven (Drexel University); Avery, Harold (Drexel University, Canada)

Competition between IUCN, near-threatened, red-bellied turtles (Pseudemys rubriventris) and
invasive red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans)

Invasive species affect populations and communities of wildlife worldwide through predation and
competition for limited resources. Globally, the invasive red-eared slider turtle ( Trachemys scripta
elegans ) may compete with native turtles for limited food, basking and other wetland resources. In the
mid-Atlantic region of the United States, the red-eared slider turtle is ecologically similar to the red-bellied
turtle (Pseudemys rubriventris). Red-bellied turtles have undergone population declines in wetlands
where red-eared slider turtles have been introduced. In anthropogenically degraded wetlands the
potential for competition may be greater between red-eared slider turtles and red-bellied turtles due to
extensive overlap for dietary resources and habitat use. We performed manipulative experiments with
juvenile turtles of both species to determine the underlying mechanisms of how red-eared slider turtles
may compete with red-bellied turtles for limited resources. Using mesocosms, we housed single and
mixed species groups at low and high densities to determine the mechanisms of competition for limited
dietary and thermoregulatory resources. We determined ingestion rates, growth rates and behavioral
interactions of turtles to determine whether red-eared slider turtles outcompete red-bellied turtles for
limited dietary and thermoregulatory resources. Preliminary results indicate that the growth rate and
ingestion rates of red-bellied turtles can be suppressed when housed with red-eared slider turtles under
limited resource conditions. Understanding the mechanisms of competition between red-eared slider
turtles and red-bellied turtles will allow us to understand the long term impacts of the red-eared slider
turtle invasions on ecologically similar native species.




                                                                                                            546
Pechmann, Joseph (Western Carolina University); Tupy, John (Western Carolina University, Canada);
Sisson, Michael (North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, Canada); Baxley, Danna (Kentucky
Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, Canada); Thurgate, Nicole (University of Adelaide, Canada);
Murphy, Michael (The Nature Conservancy, Canada); Whitfield, Steven (University of South Dakota,
Canada)

Demography and supplemental juvenile recruitment for the endangered dusky gopher frog, Rana
sevosa

We studied the population dynamics of Rana sevosa from 1996-2012 at Glen‘s Pond, Harrison County,
MS, USA using a drift fence with pitfall traps, mark-recapture, and egg mass counts. The pond held
water long enough for natural metamorphosis of tadpoles during only four years: 1997 (221 juveniles
metamorphosed), 1998 (2488 metamorphosed), 2008 (171 metamorphosed), and 2010 (60
metamorphosed). We and our colleagues supplemented natural juvenile recruitment by maintaining pond
water levels with well water in 2001 and 2005, producing 172 juveniles, and by raising tadpoles in tanks
adjacent to the pond from 2002-2012, producing &gt; 2500 juveniles. The mean number of egg masses
observed in years when breeding occurred was 35 during the first six years of the study, dropped to 21
during the next six years, and increased to 40 during the last five years. No breeding occurred during
three of 17 years due to low water levels. Age at first reproduction for individuals reared in tanks
averaged 3.1 years and ranged from 2-5 years for males, and averaged 3.5 years and ranged from 3-7
years for females. Larval rearing conditions influenced age at first reproduction. The number of breeding
seasons which an adult participated in during its lifetime averaged 1.8 and ranged from 1-6 for males, and
averaged 2.1 and ranged from 1-5 for females. Only 8% of males and 25% of females documented to be
alive skipped breeding during any year in which other gopher frogs bred. The population would likely
have gone extinct during the 1999-2007 dry period without the supplemental juvenile recruitment provided
by human management.



Peloso, Pedro (American Museum of Natural History); Forlani, Maurício (University of Richmond,
Canada); Motta, Ana Paula (Museu Nacional do Rio de Janeiro, Canada); Gaucher, Philippe (CNRS,
Canada); Sturaro, Marcelo (Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, Canada)

A taxonomic assessment of the frog genus Chiasmocleis in the Amazon river basin, with report of
three unnamed species

The humming-frog genus Chiasmocleis Méhely, 1904 is the most speciose (25 valid nominal species)
and is distributed in Panama and Tropical South America east of the Andes. The genus lack of a
phylogenetic framework and this results in systematic works to be based on a geographical perspective,
rather than on evolutionary relationships. Based on analysis of discrete external morphology,
morphometrics, and acoustic data we provide an assessment of populations occurring on the Amazon
river basin. Preliminary results suggests we recognize thirteen species to occur in the area of study, of
which 10 are previously known [ Chiasmocleis albopunctata (Boettger, 1885) , C. anatipes Walker and
Duellman 1973, C. avilapiresae Peloso and Sturaro, 2008, C. bassleri Dunn 1949, C. devriesi Funk
and Cannatella 2009, C. hudsoni Parker 1940, C. magnova Moravec and Köhler 2007, C.
shudikarensis Dunn 1949, C. supersilialbus Morales and McDiarmid 2009, C. ventrimaculata
(Andersson 1945)], and three considered new species. New species ―A‖ was previously confounded with
C. ventrimaculata and is widespread over western Amazonia, in Peru, Bolivia and Brazil (state of Acre).
New species ―B‖ is similar to C. hudsoni but shows a strikingly distinct color pattern and a unique
advertisement call. It is known from few localities in the Guiana Shield, in French Guiana and Brazil (state




                                                                                                        547
of Amapá). New species ―C‖ is knows from a couple of localities on eastern Amazonia, near the city of
Belém, Brazil (state of Pará)



Penner, Johannes (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin - Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity); Barej, Michael F. (Museum für Naturkunde - Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity, Berlin, Germany)

Biogeographical patterns of West African amphibians - searching for causes in time and space

The detailed distribution of many amphibians is rarely known. Especially in tropical regions fine grained
information is lacking. Furthermore, the reasons for the observed patterns are even harder to unlock. One
way to close these gaps is via environmental niche modelling (ENM). Our study area, the forests of
Upper Guina are one of the worlds hotspots and therefore of special importance. We used ENMs to
model the distribution of all West African amphibian species, hence including Upper Guinea . The
resulting pattern of diversity is compared against major barriers (altitude and rivers) as well as against
patterns derived from phylogenetic data for selected families. Explanations are searched for all species in
the selected niche parameters used in the ENMs but also in parameters not modelled. Unfortunately, all
identified important and unique areas in the region experience an ever increasing pressure from habitat
alteration and destruction. Gained results are compared against the current set of conservation areas,
depending on their formal status. In our opinion a regional conservation plan is urgently required.



Penniket, Sophie (University of Otago); Cree, Alison (University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand)

Variation in life-history traits with elevation in a nocturnal, viviparous gecko

Bergmann‘s rule describes an increase in body size with increasing altitude and decreasing temperature;
however, recent studies suggest that the reverse pattern holds for the majority of lizards studied. Lizards
are generally smaller at higher elevations, possibly due to benefits of an increased surface area allowing
for faster heating during sun basking. However, this explanation does not necessarily apply to species
that do not sun-bask. For a nocturnal species, it is possible that a small body size at high elevations is not
advantageous. We investigated the relationships between altitude, temperature, and body size in the
Otago-Southland gecko ( Woodworthia ―Otago-Southland‖), a primarily nocturnal, viviparous gecko from
southern New Zealand. Adult and juvenile geckos were measured from seven sites with mean elevations
of 54-1039 metres above sea level, and environmental temperatures were recorded using data loggers.
Reproductive frequency of females (which have the potential to reproduce annually or biennially) was
also examined. We observed a significant increase in body size with altitude, the opposite pattern to that
in most diurnal lizards. Female size at maturity, maximum size of adult females and males, and size at
birth were all larger at higher elevations and lower temperatures. Reproductive frequency showed no
significant trend with elevation or temperature; however, it was clear that not all females reproduced
annually. These results contrast with those found in other studies, suggesting that, for this nocturnal
lizard, large body size at high elevations is advantageous. Possible benefits include larger energy stores
to manage the challenges of reproduction and of inactivity over longer winters, and the better
conservation of heat afforded by larger sizes.




                                                                                                          548
Pereira, Isabel (University of São Paulo); Carvalho, José (Federal University of São Paulo, Canada);
Navas, Carlos (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Physiological and behavioral strategies in Brazilian anurans from the semi-arid: implications for
water balance

The Brazilian Caatinga is a semi-arid bioma characterized by the limited rains, high temperatures and
unpredictable timing of the rainy season. Although such conditions would seem harsh for anurans,
several species are found in this biome. These species exhibit notoriously different strategies for avoiding
hydric stress during the long dry season (usually ten months). Individuals of Pleurodema diplolistris and
Physalaemus albifrons (Leiuperidae), and Proceratophrys cristiceps (Cycloramphidae) bury themselves
in the Caatinga soil. These frogs exhibit lower activity during this phase, but do not remain immobile, and
can even perform a vertical migration in the substrate. During the rainy and reproductive season
individuals of these three species exhibit intense vocal activity and share a similar microhabitat. We
conducted a comparative study on blood plasma osmolality and locomotor behavior to investigate the
influence of water balance in the muscle performance of these anurans during reproductive phase. Our
results indicate that P. cristiceps and P. albifrons show similar plasma osmolality, hematocrit and
locomotor performance. However, P. diplolistris display higher plasma osmolality (280mmol/kg ±14) than
the other species observed ( P. albifrons , 224mmol/kg ±21 and P. cristiceps , 228mmol/kg ±15), even if
they exhibit similar seasonality. P. diplolistris develops higher speeds (0,38m/s±0,06) compared with P.
albifrons (0,25m/s±0,04) and P. cristiceps (0,21m/s±0,09). It is possible that P.diplolistris takes some
advantages of the higher plasma osmolality as a physiological mechanism to preserve the locomotory
performance during aestivation. This work contributes for the understanding of the physiological and
behavioral strategiesin anurans form the semi-arid. Supported by: FAPESP



Pérez i de Lanuza, Guillem (University of Valencia); Font, Enrique (University of Valencia, Canada);
Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain)

Colours of quality: structural and pigment-based chromatic signals predict different performance
traits in male wall lizards (Podarcis muralis)

Colour signals comprise a rich diversity of anatomical and physical mechanisms that open many different
avenues to communication. Animal colours result either from the differential absorption of light by
chemical compounds (i.e. pigment-based colours), or from differential scattering of light by integumental
nano-structures (i.e. structural colours). Both structural and pigment-based colours can be costly to
produce and maintain, and have been shown to inform about a variety of individual quality traits. The
distinct nature of the developmental and physiological mechanisms underlying structural vs. pigment-
based colourations seems to offer opportunities for signalling about different quality traits that vary at
different time scales. For example, many of the pigments involved in pigment-based colour production,
such as carotenoids, are directly derived from the diet and/or seem to play a direct role in vital
physiological functions (e.g. immunocompetence and free radical scavenging). This suggests that purely
pigmentary colours may be more adequate honest indicators of short-term physiological-dependent traits.
In contrast, structural colour signals may seem better suited as indicators of more stable traits depending
on long term developmental changes. Male wall lizards ( Podarcis muralis ) exhibit two different types of
conspicuous colour patches: throat and belly colorations are pigment-dependent, and include orange,
yellow and white (i.e. absence of pigment) colours, while blue outer ventral scales (OVS) on their flanks
have their peak of reflectance in the UV range, and are structural in nature. We investigated whether
throat and OVS colour variables are good predictors of male body condition index (a relatively labile trait)
and/or male bite force (a relatively stable trait that strongly depends on head size in lizards). Our results



                                                                                                         549
show that pigment-based colour variables (i.e. throat chroma) strongly associate with body condition,
whereas bite force seems to be exclusively related to OVS chroma and hue measures. These findings
lend support to the idea that pigment-based and structural colours are ideally suited to signalling about
different male characteristics.



Pérez i de Lanuza, Guillem (University of Valencia); Font, Enrique; Monterde, Juan Luis (University of
Valencia, Canada); Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain)

Sexual selection drives the evolution of sexual dichromatism in lacertid lizards

Sexual selection has often been invoked as a major force in the evolution of secondary sexual traits,
including sexually dimorphic colouration. Previous studies have shown that display complexity and
elaborate ornamentation in lizards are associated with variables that reflect the intensity of intrasexual
selection. However, these studies have relied on techniques of colour analysis based on human – rather
than lizard – visual perception, and have focused on iguanians, a clade of lizards that communicate
primarily using visual signals. Here, we use visual modelling to quantify sexual dichromatism considering
the overall colour patterns of lacertids, a group of scleroglossan lizards. We then use a comparative
phylogenetic approach to investigate the relationship between sexual dichromatism and body size
dimorphism (as an index of intrasexual selection). Sexual dichromatism is positively associated with size
dimorphism, suggesting that conspicuous colouration in male lacertids may have evolved in order to
improve opponent assessment under conditions of intense male-male competition. Our findings provide
the first evidence for the coevolution of sexual dichromatism and size dimorphism in lacertids and suggest
that the prevalent role of intrasexual selection in the evolution of visual signals is not restricted to the
iguanian lineage, but rather seems to be a general trend in diurnal lizards.



Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History); Amato, George; Feinstein, Julie (American
Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Collections in the 21st Century: an overview of issues in storing samples for genomic analysis
with an emphasis on the AMNH collection.

Repositories of frozen tissues and genetic isolates from the world's organisms represent an invaluable
resource for the study of biodiversity and evolution. However, best practices for the establishment,
organization, and maintenance are necessary if these collections are to have utility. The Ambrose Monell
Cryo Collection for Molecular and Microbial Research was established at the American Museum of
Natural History in New York in 2001 and quickly rose to prominence as one of the world's major frozen
tissue collections. With a current holding of 70,000 tissues and a capacity for up to one million tissues,
we are poised to continue to grow and expand this important resource. Critical to the value of this
collection are the following attributes. The facility is a ―state of the art‖, passive, liquid nitrogen system
ensuring best preservation of samples and protection against power failure. All of the samples are
accessioned with complete collecting, metadata and permit information. Curation of the collection allows
for retrieval of any sample within minutes and, facilitates the loaning of thousands of samples each year.
In terms of herpetological diversity, this collection holds over 9,500 samples representing 1,231 species.
Samples range from recent, comprehensive, population level, field collections numbering in hundreds of
individuals to DNA samples extracted from the Museum‘s traditional, historical collections including 100
year-old type specimens. Examples from recent herpetological research on cryptic diversity in




                                                                                                          550
crocodilians, using recently collected and historical samples will be used to illustrate the value and
importance of frozen tissue repositories for biodiversity and evolutionary studies.

Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History);

Value-added collections: Detection of parasites in herpetological museum specimens.

It has been casually estimated that each vertebrate species is host to between one and ten "macro"
parasite species and innumerable microbial symbionts and pathogens. Thus, each specimen in a
collection may, in fact, be several specimens in one. Depending on the method of preservation, these
parasites or symbionts may be preserved intact or may just have their genetic material preserved along
with that of the host and can be detected and studied. Blood parasites may be particularly well captured
in tissue collections given that their presence is not confined to a particular organ. The malaria parasites
of lizards are extremely diverse, with over 100 described species from all over the planet. However, it is
certain that this number is a gross underestimate of the true diversity of these parasites. The sampling of
these taxa has also been largely opportunistic and so may result in skewed perceptions of biodiversity
and evolution of the group. Here, I will present results from PCR-screening of lizard specimens from
Vietnam and other areas as well as similar molecular detection work on other herpetological samples
such as turtles and snakes, many of which indicate that several undiscovered taxa are present in these
hosts. However, I will also offer a strong cautionary note about the reliance on PCR alone as a detection
method and encourage all collectors to endeavor to take appropriate samples in the future to allow for
proper parasite detection and description.



Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University); Farmer, Michael (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Reducing risk of invasives via policy in the pet trade

Invasive species, whether herpetofaunal or ones that affect herpetofauna – are increasingly common, and
many are unlikely to be eradicated. Moreover, the social and economic factors that result in the majority
of these introductions are here to stay. Thus, there is urgency in devising ways to identify causes and
effectively manage invasive species as a chronic and broad problem, rather than an acute and species-
or location-specific one. Data from the US and the Caribbean help identify factors contributing to the
problem, which include – but are far from limited to – the pet trade. Standard responses, such as
belatedly banning pythons in        Florida    after they have become broadly established, are rarely
operationally effective and often result in poor public relations and unintended consequences. We
propose a decentralized approach that includes identifying particularly risky behaviors and locales,
employing the precautionary principle in making decisions, and empowering local communities to act as
both sentinels and first responders. Funding would come through a tax on the pet trade, with taxation
level to vary based on actual performance. Thus, instilling effective practices and responsible conduct
would result in reduction of the tax, whereas incidents of costly problems would result in penalties - a tax
increase. Funds would primarily be used to train and support local prevention, monitoring, and response.
Prevention could take the form of encouraging pet stores to take back unwanted animals, for example.
Monitoring would include volunteers, such as regional herpetological societies, as first responders who
may be called to deal with a found animal, and utilizing wildlife rehabilitation centers as well as, when
appropriate for a community, fire departments, police, and animal control professionals. Response would
mobilize some of the same people to identify the cause of an incursion and eliminate incipient populations
before they become problematic. This process also addresses problems originating beyond the pet trade.




                                                                                                        551
Peskov, Andrey (Institute of Ecology of Volga river Basin of Russian Academy of Science); Pavlov,
Alexey (Volzhsko-Kamsky National Nature Biosphere Reserve, Canada); Garanin, Valerian (Kazan
Federal University, Canada); Bakiev, Andrey; Malenyov, Andrey (Institute of Ecology of Volga river Basin
of Russian Academy of Science, Canada)

On hybridization of genus Vipera in the Volga River basin

In the first decade of the XXI century, it was widely accepted by most herpetologists that three Vipera
species inhabit the Volga River basin, the longest river in Europe. These include the adder V. berus ,
Nikolsky‘s viper V. nikolskii , and east steppe viper V. renardi . Both V. berus and V. renardi are
represented by nominal subspecies, whereas V. nikolskii is monotypic. The V. berus and V. nikolskii
belong to the berus complex, and the V. renardi to the ursinii complex. Here we present that the
Volga River basin is inhabited only by two species: V. berus , with subspecies V. b. berus and V. b.
nikolskii , and the species V. renardi , with subspecies V. r. renardi and V. r. bashkirovi . In the last
few years, our research together with our collaborators, U. Joger, N. Stümpel (Germany) and O.I. Zinenko
(Ukraine), showed that based on vipers‘ external morphology, ecological data, properties of venoms and
DNA analysis, natural hybridization of the above mentioned taxa occur, and result in fertile hybrids.
Hybridization range of V. b. berus and V. b. nikolskii covers several areas in the Middle Volga River
Region, and the specific distribution needs to be elucidated. Meanwhile, the most similar populations to
V. b. nikolskii are found at the borders between the Volga River and the Don River basins. Viper venom
from those populations has peptide composition typical to V. b. nikolskii , while the venom composition in
other parts of the Volga River basin is typical of V. b. berus . Most obvious populations of V. b. berus
are located in the north and the east of the Volga River basin. Natural hybridization between V. berus
and V. renardi is a unique and local phenomenon. The early described subspecies, Bashkirov‘s viper
V. r. bashkirovi , is likely a result of the hybridization between V. berus and V. renardi. Populations
concerning the subspecies are found in a sympatric area of these two species (Tatarstan Republic,
Samara and Ulyanovsk region; Russia). Most populations from the sympatric area, in Russia, and all the
populations out of the sympatric



Pessier, Allan (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research);

Disease Considerations and Risk Assessment for Amphibian Reintroductions and Translocations

Global amphibian declines and the rapidity in which they have occurred has resulted in expansion of
survival assurance populations as a conservation strategy for threatened species. The goal of assurance
populations is to reintroduce species to the wild when the original cause of population declines has been
mitigated and increasingly these captive populations are the last representatives of a species. Therefore,
the need to consider disease as a limiting factor to amphibian reintroductions has reached a heightened
level of importance.        Many of the most devastating examples of amphibian population decline are
linked to anthropogenic introduction of the amphibian chytrid fungus and this highlights the need to
reduce the risk of infectious diseases in the management of reintroduction and translocation programs. It
is nearly impossible to design programs that are completely free of disease risk, but risk can be reduced
by careful planning and adherence to recommendations for risk mitigation. One of the biggest risks for
introducing detrimental infectious agents into wild amphibian populations via a reintroduction or
translocation program is exposure of reintroduction candidates to other amphibians from outside their
native range.To avoid this risk the ideal reintroduction candidates are housed in long-term isolation from
cosmopolitan amphibian collections.The need for pre-release disease testing in a reintroduction or
translocation program and the extent of the screening procedures needed is dependent on a risk
assessment. Risk assessments and disease testing are usually simple and minimal for animals kept in



                                                                                                      552
long-term isolation and become much more complicated and extensive for animals exposed to a
cosmopolitan collection. Besides consideration of how animals have been housed a critical element of a
risk assessment is assembly of disease information from the source captive populations and the wild
populations at reintroduction sites. This information is gathered by necropsy examination of animals that
die and targeted testing such as PCR for specific pathogens of interest (e.g. the chytrid fungus or
ranaviruses). In general, if an identical pathogen is present in both the captive and wild populations, the
presence of that pathogen should not impact the decision on whether to reintroduce captive animals to
the wild. However, this decision becomes more complicated when acknowledging that currently used
tests for the chytrid fungus or ranaviruses cannot always discern between different strains of these
pathogens. Development of better guidelines to assist program managers and veterinary consultants in
making risk assessments and disease testing protocols are in progress.



Peterson, Bill (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service); Mantua, Nate (University of Washington,
Canada); Kosro, Mike (Oregon State University, Canada)

An evaluation of freshwater and marine habitat cues for migrating salmon - to what degree are
they coherent?

Waples and Douglas pose several questions to ponder relative to this symposium and this talk addresses
one of their questions: ―For species like salmon (and birds) that migrate between different environments,
adaptive plasticity requires high cue reliability (e.g., freshwater cues that trigger smolt migration must
reliably predict optimal times to enter the ocean). What effects will climate change have on cue reliability
and adaptive plasticity?‖ The general idea behind our talk is (1) are the cues which trigger migration from
freshwater (FW) towards the ocean (OCN) in spring correlated with cues that indicate that the ocean is
ready to receive the fish? That is, is the initiation of spring in FW correlated with initiation of spring in the
OCN? In our talk we will be looking at a collection of different measures relevant to the timing of ―spring‖
in both freshwater and the northern part of the California Current system:

snowmelt timing in western US rivers

coastal upwelling and coastal sea level

seasonal shifts in coastal current from coastal radar

the timing of the appearance of cold salty water at depth as a result of the initiation of upwelling

zooplankton community changes from hydrographic surveys

We will also attempt to generate other temperature-based measure of terrestrial spring, something like
"initiation of growing season/date of the last frost" for western OR/WA. Finally, we will consider how these
measures might change under different climate change scenarios and speculate as to how salmon might