                 30
communities from populations of the same species inhabiting continuous tracts of forest. Such differences
were noted for species that include Proceratophrys boiei, Aplastodiscus leucopygius, Dendropsophus
minutus and Phyllomedusa distincta. A total of 214 morphotypes of bacterial colonies were isolated from
these species, 27 of which exhibited inhibition against species of pathogenic bacteria. The greatest
diversity of isolates, and the greatest number exhibiting antimicrobial properties, were grown from
samples taken from P. boiei. I identified 68 isolates from these communities, which were dominated by
members of the Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteriodetes and Actinobacteria, which are all typical of
forest environments. These results suggest that the environment determines the profiles of the microbial
communities of the anurans in this study. Although the ecological implications of these differences is not
yet understood, there may be species-specific communities found within particular taxonomic groups of
anurans that may be predicted by the characteristics of the environment, life history traits, or inherent
physiology of each group. The presence of bacteria with antimicrobial properties may be of primary
importance for these amphibians as they protect against pathogenic microrganisms. In this way, the
environment could act as a buffer to the susceptibility of the amphibians infectious diseases, and
alterations to these landscapes would compromise this barrier of protection.



Aubret, Fabien (SEEM CNRS à MOULIS);

Body size evolution on islands: are adult size variations in tiger snakes a non-adaptive
consequence of selection on birth size?

Mean adult size has been used as the traditional measure of body size to explain trends of insular
gigantism and dwarfism in a wide array of taxa. However, patterns of variation in body size at birth have
surprisingly received little attention, leaving open the possibility that adult body size differences are non –
adaptive consequences of selection acting on neonate body size.                 Here, I used an empirical and
correlative approach to test this hypothesis in a mosaic of 12 island and mainland snake populations in
Australia. Data collected on 597 adult and 1084 neonate tiger snakes showed that (1) both adult and
neonate mean body size varied strongly across populations; (2) prey diversity and size convincingly
explained birth size variations: birth size, notably gape size, correlated with prey size; (3) neonate snout -
vent length was significantly correlated with neonate gape size; and (4) neonate snout - vent length was
significantly correlated with adult snout - vent length. Post - natal growth rates recorded under common
garden conditions differed across populations and were correlated with mean prey size. These data
collectively suggest that (1) prey size is the main driver for the evolution of body size at birth in gape -
limited predators; (2) adult size variations may reflect selective forces acting on earlier life stages; and (3)
adult size variations may also reflect resource availability during ontogeny (notably prey diversity).



Austin, Christopher (Louisiana State University); Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History,
New York, NY, United States)

Green Blood in Lizards: Hypotheses for an Enigmatic Physiology

The bile pigments biliverdin and bilirubin are cytotoxic and neurotoxic physiological waste products that
when chronically elevated cause jaundice and can induce death, particularly with liver disease. Toxicity
due to bile pigment accumulation is common in individuals with decreased liver function, patients with the
life-threatening Gilbert‘s and Crigler-Najjar syndromes, and newborn babies. In contrast, some
extraordinary lizards from the megadiverse island of New Guinea have evolved green blood. The green
coloration of the blood is due to high levels of the green colored bile pigment biliverdin that overwhelms



                                                                                                             31
the intense color of the red blood cells. These lizards have blood concentrations that would cause
jaundice and death in humans and other vertebrates. The adaptive significance of hyperbiliverdism is
unknown, but three hypotheses are addressed.



Austin, James (University of Florida); Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States);
Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada)

Distinctiveness in spite of gene flow? Elucidating the role of inter-specific gene flow in the
divergence of a rare endemic frog

The Florida bog frog ( Rana okaloosae ) is known from approximately three-dozen tributaries of the East
Bay, Shoal and Yellow Rivers in Santa Rosa, Okaloosa, and Walton counties, Florida, USA (an area of
less than 20 km2). It is a member of the Rana catesbeiana species group, and mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) phylogenetics has indicated a sister-species relationship with the widespread bronze frog ( R.
clamitans ). More specifically, these mtDNA of two species are polyphyletic, and include shared
haplotypes. This could reflect recent divergence with incomplete lineage sorting, a genetic sweep of bog
frog mtDNA from bronze frogs during a recent secondary contact, or continuous ongoing gene flow
between the two species. Bronze frogs are found syntopically with bog frogs, leading to occasional
hybridization as demonstrated by microsatellite DNA and anecdotal information from field observations.
The extent of historical introgression between these species is of interest as a study of recent speciation,
but also as a conservation question. When one species is widespread and is syntopic with a rare
geographically restricted species, recurrent gene flow can pose the risk of extinction of the latter.
Whether inter-specific gene flow has persisted, and at what rate over the history of these species, can be
insightful in light of recent evidence of contemporary hybridization. The objective of this project is to use a
combination of variable nuclear microsatellite markers and mitochondrial DNA sequences to elucidate the
recent evolutionary history of bog and bronze frogs. The evolutionary history of this species pair is
examined using a combination of coalescent modeling, a comparison of Bayesian gene flow models
using Bayes factor analysis, and isolation-with-migration models.



Avendaño Casadiego, Karina (Universidad del Tolima); Montealegre Delgado, Xiomara Katherine;
Bernal Bautista, Manuel Hernando (Universidad del Tolima, Canada)

Effect of habitat size on survival, developmental time and growth rate in tadpoles of Engystomops
pustulosus and Rhinella humboldti

It has been recognized that growth rate, developmental rate and length of the tadpole period are strongly
affected by environmental factors such as temperature, oxygen, amount of food, larval density, water
volume and pond drying. Tadpoles of many anuran species develop in ephemeral ponds, and particularly
two species, E. pustulosus and R. humboldti breed in temporary ponds with strong differences in the
habitat size (space and water volume). So, we were interested in testing the effect of three permanent
habitat sizes (large, medium and small), with some similar environmental field conditions, on the survival,
developmental time and growth rate in tadpoles of these two species. We placed 15 containers in an area
of the laboratory five of them for the large habitat (size: 34 X 27X 12.5 cm with 2000 ml of previously
aerated water ),other five for the medium habitat (16.5 X 16.5 X 9 cm with 1000 ml of water), and five
more containers for the small habitat (13.5 X 9.5 X 3.5 cm with 100 ml of water ).In each one of the
containers we placed 4g of soil obtained from the University botanical garden, one macrophyte, and 10
tadpoles at Gosner stage 25. After starting the experiment, every day we supply 0.01 g of fish food for



                                                                                                            32
tadpoles of each container, every six days we changed 50% of the water and every twenty days we
removed all the water and materials and measured the accumulated survival, the developmental rate and
the growth rate. We finished the experiment when all tadpoles completed the metamorphosis or died. For
the two study species we found similar results. Survival was higher in the large habitat than in the
medium and small ones (E. pustulosus: 44%, 2% and 1%, respectively; R. humboldti: 4%, 0%, 0%).
Developmental time was also faster in the large habitat (in E. pustulosus: stage 46 was reach at 81 days
Vs 120 days for the other habitats; in R. humboldti, the stage 42 was reach after 160 days only in the
large habitat), and the growth rate was significantly higher in tadpoles from the large habitat size (Anova
p< 0.001 for all cases). Physicochemical conditions of the water in the containers were not significantly
different between and within treatments: temperature 23°C, dissolved oxygen varied between 5.98 and
4.7 mg/L and pH 6.7. Therefore, we concluded that under natural conditions tadpoles of E. pustulosus
and R. humboldti are less likely to survive to reach metamorphosis in small ponds with less water volume.



Avila-Pires, Teresa (Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi); Hoogmoed, Marinus (Museu Paraense Emilio
Goeldi, Belem-PA, Brazil)

Herpetofauna of Serra dos Martírios / Andorinhas, Pará, Brasil, a transitional Amazonian forest-
savannah region

Amazonia represents the largest continuous area of tropical rainforest, encompassing parts of eight
South American countries. Even though forest environments predominate, it harbors open vegetation
enclaves with distinct physiognomies, and it borders in the east and south on savannah habitats. It is
believed that Amazonian limits varied during its history, expanding or retracting during respectively wetter
and drier periods. Moreover, present deforestation processes tend to allow the invasion of species
adapted to open areas into previously forested areas. The study of areas situated in the ecotone
Amazonian forest–savannah may help us understand both the historical interplay between these
physiognomies and the consequences of present day deforestation. The State Park Serra dos Martírios /
Andorinhas (54,000ha, elevation up to 600m), is located in SE Pará (Brazil), on the southern edge of the
Amazonian forest and close to the Cerrado. It presents a mosaic of vegetation types, from open, grassy
or rocky fields, through sclerophyll, deciduous, and subperenifolial forests, to perenifolial, periodically
inundated forest along the Araguaia River. Besides, even within the park there are inhabitants and farms,
and cows freely enter Cerrado areas. We studied the local herpetofauna from October 22–November 4,
2012, through active search, 16 pitfall traps with drift fences (each a line of four 60L buckets), and four
funnel traps placed in creeks and pools for aquatic species. We found 34 amphibians (anurans) and 36
reptiles (20 lizards, nine snakes, five chelonians and two caimans). The mosaic of physiognomies put
together forest and cerrado species, like Polychrus marmoratus and P. acutirostris, and four distinct
species of Mabuya, and it apparently allows some typically forest species to penetrate the cerrado to a
certain extent (e.g., Dendrobates galactonotus, Leptodactylus mystaceus, Kentropyx calcarata) and vice-
versa (e.g., Leptodactylus syphax, Gymnodactylus amarali, Tropidurus oreadicus). A number of species
was able to occupy anthropogenic environments. Part of the fauna was not previously recorded from
Pará, a few specimens (e.g. Colostethus sp. and Mabuya sp.) may represent undescribed species, and
others, like eight specimens of different size classes of Mesoclemmys, raised taxonomic questions that
will be discussed.




                                                                                                         33
Backlin, Adam (US Geological Survey); Santana, Frank (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation
Research, Escondido, CA, United States)

Lessons learned from 13 years of recovery with the critically endangered mountain-yellow legged
frog (Rana muscosa) in southern California

The once abundant mountain yellow-legged frog ( Rana muscosa ) has declined from 99% of its former
range in southern California since the late 1960‘s. It is currently listed as endangered by both the US Fish
and Wildlife Service and the state of California. The mountain yellow-legged frog is a high elevation
species that requires at least two years to complete metamorphosis.            The US Geological Survey has
been monitoring the remaining populations and involved with restoration for this species since 2000. The
San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research has been conducting captive husbandry and
restoration since 2006 and were the first to successfully breed this species in captivity in 2010. Captively
bred animals were released in 2010 and 2011 in an attempt to reestablish a single site. The nascent
nature of the captive breeding program has presented us with challenges in our reestablishment effort.
Small sample sizes, low post-release detectability, and unavailability of frogs from multiple life stages has
limited our ability to develop a standardized reintroduction methodology for the species. We will discuss
some of the challenges and successes of managing anuran reintroductions during the nascent stages of
captive breeding programs.



Bailey, Larissa (Colorado State University);

An Introduction to Occupancy Estimation Techniques for Amphibians

Concern about worldwide amphibian declines intensified in the 1990s when scientists became aware of
the scope of the problem and the attention highlighted the dearth of long-term, large-scale studies of
amphibian systems and their dynamics. In response, the U.S. Geological Survey established a nation-
wide program to evaluate amphibian population status across the entire U.S., using species occurrence
as a response or state variable in a variety of studies, many of which are highlighted in this symposium.
Recent advances in estimation methods have emphasized that reliable inferences can be made from
these types of studies if detection and occupancy probabilities are simultaneous estimated. A key feature
of occupancy estimation methods is that they generally require both spatial and temporal replication. In
this presentation, I will give a brief overview of occupancy models in the context of existing amphibian
studies. I will discuss questions commonly encountered during both the design and analysis phase of
occupancy studies and describe resources and software available to practitioners.



Baird, Troy (Department of Biology, University of Central Oklahoma); Baird, Teresa (Department of
Biology, University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK, United States); Shine, Richard (University of
Sydney, Sydney, N, Australia)

Conditional male social tactics in an Australian dragon's lair: The roles of body size, territory
takeover by aggression, and coloration signals in a high density population

The evolution of alternative male social tactics is expected when intense competition coupled with the
superior competitive ability of some individuals limits access to resources and reproductive opportunities
for other individuals. We conducted observational and experimental studies on eastern Australian water
dragons ( Physignathus lesueurii ) in a high density population where competition is intense, to test the
hypotheses that mature males adopt alternative social tactics that are plastic (conditional), and that large



                                                                                                          34
size and dimorphic coloration are important for resource-holding potential (RHP) and social signaling.
Approximately one-half of mature males ( N = 14) defended territories using high rates of patrol and
advertisement display, whereas 16 mature, but smaller males utilized non-territorial social tactics. The
plasticity of social tactics in this species, and their dependence on body size, was confirmed by two
instances of spontaneous eviction of territory owners by non-territorial males, and by marked shifts in
tactics by the latter in response to temporary experimental removals, followed (usually) by their expulsion
when original owners were reinstated. Home ranges of females overlapped those of several territorial and
non-territorial males, but females interacted more frequently with males that defended territories. We
describe three behavior patterns, exhibited primarily under unstable social conditions that display the
dimorphic coloration characteristic of male water dragons. Diminished responses by territorial males to a
supra-normally large and colorful model intruder, also support the hypothesis that water dragon males
display dimorphic ventral coloration only to convey a high level of aggressive intent, whereas routine
advertisement involves less intense (and costly) head-movement displays. Chronic high energetic costs
of territory defense (due to high local population density) may select for males of this species to cycle
between territorial and non-territorial social tactics depending upon their changing energetic status and
the level of intrasexual competition.



Bakkegard, Kristin (Samford University); Godwin, James (Auburn University Environmental Institute,
Canada); Hoss, Shannon (San Diego State University, Canada); Wines, Michael (Auburn University,
Canada)

Movement within a population of Red Hills Salamanders, Phaeognathus hubrichti

The Red Hills Salamander, Phaeognathus hubrichti , is an IUCN Red List Endangered plethodontid
endemic to the Red Hills region of southern Alabama. This fossorial species lives in burrows
predominantly on steep, north facing slopes. A cryptic species, nothing is known of movement between
different burrows on a slope. We report on an ongoing study of a PIT- tagged population of Red Hills
Salamanders in Monroe County, Alabama, USA. Salamanders were implanted with 134.2 kHz ISO tags
(Biomark TX 1440) and detected with a Biomark 2001F-ISO reader with a racquet antenna. With a
maximum tag-read depth of 30 cm, we can detect tags through soil and rocky substrate, thus allowing
recaptures without needing to see the animal. Burrows were individually numbered and geo-referenced
using Trimble Real Time Kinematic GPS equipment for control point establishment and Trimble 5600
Total Station to map burrow entrances. Salamanders (N = 115) were tagged Dec 2007 – Feb 2008 then
released into their capture burrow. They were monitored five times during March – May 2008, monthly
(except August) in 2009, and six times during 2010-2012. We detected 72.2% of the salamanders at least
once post release; mean number of detections was 3.9 (range = 1–11); 63.4% were detected at least
twice. Of those, 53.4% changed burrows zero or one time; 24.6% moved at least 3 times. The longest
occupancy time for the same burrow was 23 months (6 detections). Distance moved was calculated
starting 1 month post release. Mean distance moved for all detections was 5.1 m (SD = 37.6; N = 236
detections; 77 salamanders); for mean distance moved including only when a salamander changed
burrows was 14.2 m (SD = 55.5; N = 106 detections; 48 salamanders). These means are right skewed.
Based on maximum distance moved, 75.3% moved less than 2 m and 92.2% of salamanders moved less
than 10 m. Maximum distance moved was approximately 400 m (by a female and juvenile) to new
burrows in an area adjacent to the main slope. The next longest movement was 83.2 m by a female. The
longest distance moved by a male was 77.7 m. Red Hills Salamanders apparently do not move often or
far. We recommend that all populations of this patchily distributed species be protected against habitat
destruction because of the limited dispersal capability of this salamander.




                                                                                                        35
Balaz, Vojtech (Department of Biology and Diseases of Wildlife Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene and
Ecology University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno); Civis, Petr; Vojar, Jiri (Department
of Ecology, Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic); Literak, Ivan (Department of Biology and Diseases of Wildlife Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene
and Ecology University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno, Brno, Czech Republic); Garner,
Trenton (Zoological Society of London, London, United Kingdom)

Amphibian chytrid fungus surveillance in the Czech Republic

The fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis became exemplary emerging pathogen owing to its rapid
spread and devastating impact on amphibian populations in many parts of the world, including Europe.
However many European countries show no evidence of disease-mediated declines hence the intensity
of research is limited. Awareness of the chytridiomycosis danger rapidly declines on the way to east and
so the knowledge of its presence in amphibian species of the area of Central and Eastern Europe. The
Czech Republic harbours surprisingly rich amphibian diversity (21 species) and many species are present
in relic or edge-of distribution populations, these receive a lot of conservation attention. Data on B.
dendrobatidis in the Czech Republic are being collected since 2008. The overall prevalence is similar to
surrounding countries but significantly varies in hosts, time and geography. Intensity of infection detected
by real time qPCR is in general very low, with exceptions in case of Pelophylax kl. esculentus, Bombina
variegata and Bufo viridis. Mortality caused my chytridiomycosis was detected only once. Bombina
variegata, Bufo calamita and Bufo viridis showed ability to clear infection. Genus Rana and Pelobates
fuscus remain negative even when infected amphibians of other species share the same water-body with
them. Models on habitat suitability show lowlands to harbour more infections than mountains. We
conducted first attempts to collect the fungus for cultivation. Proper genetic typing of the local lineage is
crucial for planning surveillance and future conservation activities.



Balaz, Vojtech (Department of Biology and Diseases of Wildlife Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene and
Ecology University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno); Vörös, Judit (Hungarian Natural
History Museum, Budapest, Hungary); Garner, Trenton; Bielby, Jon (Zoological Society of London,
London, United Kingdom)

Taxonomic and geographic selectivity of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Europe: Assessing
risk and directing future monitoring

The global amphibian decline is a generally accepted phenomenon affecting communities on global scale
in the last decades. Several processes have been shown to be primary drivers of species loss and
reductions of amphibian populations. Of these, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) represents the most
important of the emerging pathogens. Declines are non-randomly distributed across the Amphibia and
consistently carry a phylogenetic signal. In Europe some amphibians are susceptible to both infection and
mortality attributable to chytridiomycosis, whereas others seem less likely to harbour the pathogen.
Because Bd in Europe appears to be expanding its range as well as causing local amphibian mortality
and declines it is receiving considerable attention. We have generated primary data on infection in six
Central and Eastern European countries and integrated them with previously published and unpublished
European data. Altogether 44 native and one introduced species were included in the final dataset that
consisted of 7403 individual samples. We used contingency tables and randomisation tests to compare
background prevalence with the prevalence observed in focal clades. The analyses showed that brown
frogs in the genus Rana and subfamily Salamandrinae are consistently under-infected, while the
phylogenetic lineage formed by families Alytidae and Bombinatoridae is significantly over-infected. Clades
Pelophylax, Bufonidae and Pleurodeliane showed inconsistent trends that varied depending on the




                                                                                                          36
country. Although several taxonomic gaps exist this study provides guidelines for initiating new and
expanding current Bd research in Europe, useful especially in cases when resources for detection are
limited.



Baldi, Ludmila Cristina (Fisheries Institute); Santos, Fernanda Bastos (Fisheries Institute, São Paulo,
Canada); Neves, Pedro Verdan; Carvalho, Katerine Pereira; Esteves, Katharina Eichbaum (Fisheries
Institute, São Paulo, Brazil); Hipólito, Márcio (Biological Institute, São Paulo, Brazil); Ferreira, Cláudia
Maris (Fisheries Institute, São Paulo, Brazil)

The Anuran community in riparian zones under influence of sugar cane cultiviation: preliminary
results

The riparian zone occurs at the interface between aquatic and terrestrial environments. Several studies
indicate that important interactions occurs in this region, with high biodiversity and great diversity of
environmental processes. Considering the widespread cultivation of sugar cane in São Paulo State, and
the limited information about the effect of this culture on aquatic environments, this study aims to analyze
its effects on the anuran community. We chose three streams under different riparian conditions: 1-
predominance of sugarcane cultivation (site A), 2- predominance of secondary forest with sugar cane
cultivation on the vicinity (site B) and 3-riparian vegetation with preserved native forest (site C), with three
repetitions each one, located in regions of high density sugar-cane plantations in the basins of the
Piracicaba-Capivari-Jundiaí rivers (PCJ). We collected the anurans with pit falls traps using fence guides
and active searching by visual encounter. Altogether, we found individuals belonging to the following
families: Leiuperidae, Leptodactylidae, Bufonidae, Microhylidae and Craugastoridae. In site A, 93
individuals of six different species were recorded: Physalaemus cuvieri (62), Physalaemus centralis (18),
Physalaemus marmoratus (2), Elachistocleis cesarii (5), Leptodactylus fuscus (4) and Pseudopaludicola
sp (2). In site B we found 6 individuals of three different species: Physalaemus cuvieri (2), Physalaemus
centralis (1) and Rhinella ornata (3). In site C we found 12 individuals of six different species:
Physalaemus cuvieri (1), Physalaemus centralis (2), Rhinella ornata (5), Haddadus binotatus (2),
Eupemphix nattereri (1) and Leptodactylus mistacynus (1). The results indicated higher Margalef richness
in site C (2,012) compared to site A (1,086) and B (1,116), and higher Shannon diversity in site C (1,583)
compared to sites A (0,999) and B (1,011). Simpson dominance higher in site A (0,508) (especially of
Physalaemus cuvieri, which is a generalist species found in impacted habitats), compared to sites B
(0,266) and C (0,181). These preliminary results, indicate the importance of the riparian zone for the
preservation of the anuran community, what ensuring a good water quality and shelter to the animals,
both indispensable to the anuran life cycle.



Ball, Lydia (Colby College); Bevier, Catherine (Colby College, Canada)

The role of epibiotic bacteria in modulating skin secretion production in the Spring Peeper,
Pseudacris crucifer

Amphibian skin glands synthesize and secrete many important compounds, including antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) important for protection against pathogenic bacteria and fungi. The mechanisms of how
these are produced and their composition remains unclear. This study explored the mechanism in male
Spring Peepers, Pseudacris crucifer. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that minimal exposure to
bacteria after being maintained in a sterile environment is sufficient to stimulate the production of
potentially protective skin secretions. Using sterile techniques, treatment frogs were collected in the field



                                                                                                             37
and swabbed to sample resident microbial species. At each phase, we also collected skin secretions
using mild electrical stimulation, quantified the protein content, and qualitatively assessed the complexity
using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). After five recovery days, treatment frogs were
sampled for bacteria again, depleted of skin secretions, treated with antibiotics to sterilize the skin
surface, then exposed to colonies of the bacterium, Aeromonas hydrophila. This species is commonly
found in natural aquatic habitats in Maine and causes red-leg disease in frogs. Results from a pilot study
suggest that the sterilization treatment is effective in minimizing resident bacteria during experiment
treatment, and that skin secretion production is induced by exposure to bacteria. It appears, then, that
epibiotic bacteria play an important role in the immune response in frogs, and that secretion production
may be induced by exposure to a transient pathogen.



Ballouard, Jean-marie (SOPTOM-CRCC); Caron, Sébastien; Gravier, Camille; Fournière, Kévin;
Servant, Laure (SOPTOM-CRCC, GONFARON, France); Michel, Catherine Louise (CEBC-CNRS, Villiers
en bois, France); Bonnet, Xavier (CEBC -CNRS, Villiers en bois, France)

Impact of field managements on body condition, thermoregulation and stress level of Testudo
hermanni

All tortoise species face strong decline, especially in the arid Mediterranean areas. The Hermann tortoise
( Testudo hermanni ) notably is critically endangered in Western Europe. In France, this species subsists
in the Var district (South Est) where small patchy populations are particularly vulnerable due to habitat
destruction, urbanization, uncontrolled fires and closing of other areas owing to changing agricultural
practices. It has been assumed that open habitats are critical in providing opportunities for
thermoregulation, laying sites, and favoring the growth of food resources. Water availability supposedly
relaxes environmental constraints. Therefore field management actions have been set up through a
conservation Life+ program (2010-2014). We evaluated the effect of habitat openings and of the creation
of water ponds in two independent sites. We used a simple experimental design comparing control versus
managed areas. In 2010, before managements, we performed initial surveys and monitored 38 tortoises
fitted with radio transmitters and temperature data loggers. In 2011, following managements, we monitor
40 tortoises (20 per experiment). We evaluate the impact of management on tortoises using physiological
indexes such as body condition, basal stress level, and hydric stress. Thermal profiles of the tortoise are
also recorded. This study will provide important information to better estimate the usefulness of field
managements which could be implemented at national and European levels. The results will be also
important to organize reintroduction or reinforcement programs.



Bangley, Charles (East Carolina University);

Potential competitive and predatory interactions between spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias), and
striped bass (Morone saxatilis) in the coastal waters of North Carolina.

Spiny dogfish and striped bass are high-level predators in the Northwest Atlantic ecosystem that have
recently recovered from overfishing, and both species overwinter in North Carolina waters. Striped bass
and spiny dogfish abundance, salinity, temperature, and depth data were taken from winter trawl surveys
conducted in North Carolina waters from 1996-1998 and 2006-2010. Diet data were collected from striped
bass in 2006-2007 and from spiny dogfish in 2006-2007 and 2010. Spatial and dietary overlaps were
determined between the two species and the importance of striped bass in the diet of spiny dogfish was
assessed. Spatial overlap was consistently high and abundance was more strongly correlated with




                                                                                                         38
environmental factors than the abundance of the other predator.           Dietary overlap was less than 40%
between striped bass and dogfish sampled in 2006-2007 but was over 84% between striped bass and
spiny dogfish sampled in 2010. Atlantic menhaden (Brevoortia tyrannus) and bay anchovy (Anchoa
mitchilli) were the most important overlapping prey species. Spiny dogfish in North Carolina waters may
have consumed 0.91% of the striped bass stock during the winter. These data suggest that spiny dogfish
are occasional predators of striped bass and there is potential for competition between the two predators,
but these interactions are insufficient to affect the abundance and distribution of either species. However,
the stability of these interactions may depend on the availability of their shared prey.



Bangs, Max (University of Arkansas);

Decline of the Savannah River Redeye Bass (Micropterus coosae) due to Introgressive
Hybridization with Invasive Alabama Spotted Bass (Micropterus punctulatus henshalli)

Invasives can promote extirpation or extinction of native species through a myriad of biological
mechanisms. Introgressive hybridization, for example, can be just as detrimental in this regard as
predation and competition especially in fishes that have limited reproductive barriers. Despite this, it is
often overlooked as an issue due to the necessity of employing molecular genetic techniques. On two
occasions, (2004 and 2010), we sampled individuals (n=623, n=653 respectfully) from four reservoirs of
the Savannah River drainage system (South Carolina) in an attempt to quantify temporal and spatial
evidence of hybridization and introgression between introduced (Alabama Spotted Bass, Micropterus
punctulatus henshalli ; Smallmouth Bass, M. dolomieu ) and endemics (Redeye Bass, M. coosae ;
Largemouth Bass, M. salmoides ). We utilized three bi-allelic nuclear (nDNA) loci and one mitochondrial
(mtDNA) locus and our results indicate overwhelming introgression between spotted and redeye bass
coupled with strong selection for spotted bass in the lakes. Introgression is limited to the reservoirs with
strong selection for spotted bass genotypes, whereas refugial areas in the tributaries allow for persistence
of endemic and rare lineage redeye bass.



Banyal, Harjeet S. (HIMACHAL PRADESH UNIVERSITY, SHIMLA);

Laudakia tuberculata Hardwicke & Gray, 1827, a rock agama lizard from Kalaop-Khajjiar Wildlife
Sanctuary in Himachal Pradesh, India

India is home to 456 species of reptiles—244 species of serpents, 178 of lizards, 31 of testudines and 3
species of crocodilians. Laudakia tuberculata Hardwicke & Gray, 1827, the Kashmir Rock Agama lizard is
hereby reported for the first time from the vicinity of lake at Khajjiar, the Mini Switzerland, at 1920m amsl.
The omnivorous lizards are diurnal, terrestrial and seen settled on rocks or large stones in the area with
less vegetation during sunny daytime. When sunlight was low the lizards remained in crevices or
underneath the rocks. A large number of individuals were seen from April to October and the count
declined in March or November while the lizard hibernated during winter months. Laudakia tuberculata is
sturdy with flattened head and body. Adults are 10-12 cm with abnormally long tail. In male limbs and tail
are bluish with light spots all over the body. Fore and hind limbs strong, former being stout and shorter. A
complete account of the lizard will be presented at the conference.




                                                                                                           39
Barbo, Fausto Erritto (Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de São Paulo); Gasparini, João Luiz
(Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, Canada); Almeida, Antonio de P. (ICMBio - Projeto Tamar,
Canada); Grazziotin, Felipe G. (Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de São Paulo, Canada); Ferrarini,
José Mario G.; Sawaya, Ricardo J. (Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Canada)

Another modified population of lancehead in the Bothrops jararaca complex in a continental
island of the Brazilian coast

The genus Bothrops includes about 50 species, distributed in six groups: B. alternatus , B. atrox , B.
jararaca , B. jararacussu , B. neuwiedi , and B. taeniatus . The B. jararaca group is composed by B.
jararaca , a widespread species from Atlantic forest, and two insular species, B. alcatraz and B.
insularis , from Alcatrazes and Queimada Grande islands, respectively. Other two insular forms from
Vitória and Buzios islands, in the coast of São Paulo state are under description. Here we recorded
another new insular and modified population of lancehead from Franceses island, ca. 4 Km off the coast
of Espírito Santo state, southeastern Brazil. This island is covered mainly by the Atlantic forest formation
with a total area of about 15 ha. This population presents some particular characters, as a small adult
size, and the diet specialized in ectothermic prey, mostly lizards, but also centipedes and conspecific
snakes. This population can be distinguished morphologically from B. alcatraz and the form from Vitoria
island by its higher number of ventral and subcaudal scales. Despite overlapping the number of ventral
and subcaudal scales with most of mainland B. jararaca , and the form from Buzios island, this
population can be distinguished by the smaller adult size. From B. insularis , this population can be
distinguished by the smaller adult size, higher number of ventral scales, and the color pattern. This new
population is very abundant on the island (ca. two snakes per hour-person of visual search) and can be
found acitve on the leaf litter. Fourteen out of 33 individuals found presented remnants of prey in stomach
and gut contents, including lizards (N = 9), centipedes (N = 4), and conspecific snakes (N = 1). All youngs
(N = 5) presented yellowish tail-tip, as observed in the juveniles of the mainland B. jararaca . The
modifications presented by this insular population, specially the small adult size, should be related to
ecological agents as prey availability.



Barichivich, William (USGS-SESC); Calhoun, Daniel; Brown, Mary; Cressler, Alan; Dalton, Melinda;
Hughes, William; Walls, Susan (USGS, Canada)

Environmental monitoring of the amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) in
the southeastern United States: Any evidence of disease-related population declines?

Pathogens and infectious diseases are of significant concern in biological conservation. In many parts of
the world population declines and extinctions of amphibians have been attributed to the pathogenic
amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), which causes chytridiomycosis.
Considerable effort has focused on detecting Bd in its amphibian host but, until recently, little was known
about the temporal and spatial distribution of this pathogen in the environment. Herein we report the
results of concurrent host and environmental sampling of Bd on public lands in the southeastern United
States. Between April 2008 and April 2010 we swabbed 1206 amphibians and filtered water (315
samples) from 71 sites. Sites included isolated wetlands, streams, and caves from nine national parks
and wildlife refuges extending from the (Southern) Appalachian Mountains to the Florida Keys.
Additionally, a wide variety of frogs (20 species), as well as salamanders (21 species), was sampled.
Results from quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) of swabs and filters showed Bd to be
common and widespread throughout the region. Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis was detected in each
state and in seven of nine US Department of Interior lands sampled. In most cases these were the first




                                                                                                         40
records of Bd on the properties sampled and are only the second and third records for Florida and
Alabama respectively.

Our results illustrate a lack of detection of Bd on amphibians does not imply an absence of this pathogen
in the environment. Discordance between water and biological samples underscores the need to conduct
both environmental and biological sampling to elucidate the distribution of this pathogen in the
environment and its potential to infect amphibians. Contrary to the pattern of declines and extinctions
observed in Mesoamerica and Australia, Bd is quite ubiquitous in the southeastern US without noticeable
changes to amphibian populations. However, mortality events associated with other know amphibian
pathogens (e.g. ranavirus and the perkinsus like organism) were observed during the course of this study.




Barlow, Axel (Bangor University); Baker, Karis; Hendry, Catriona; Peppin, Lindsay (Bangor University,
Canada); Phelps, Tony (Cape Reptile Institute, Canada); Tolley, Krystal (South African National
Biodiversity Institute, Canada); Wuster, Wolfgang (Bangor University, Canada)

Retracing Pleistocene refugial isolation in southern Africa: a case study of the widespread African
puff adder (Bitis arietans).

Phylogeographic studies of widespread African savannah mammals have typically found distinct
mitochondrial clades in East, West or southern Africa, leading to the hypothesis that these areas served
as open habitat refugia during the Pleistocene, isolated from each other by expanding tropical forests
during warm and humid interglacial periods. However, comparative data from widespread African reptiles
is currently lacking. We present a phylogeographic investigation of the widespread African puff adder (
Bitis arietans ), a snake that inhabits open habitat formations throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Multiple
parapatric mitochondrial clades occur across the current distribution of B. arietans . These include a
widespread southern clade that is subdivided into four separate clades, suggesting a history of refugial
isolation in southern Africa. We investigated the possible causes of isolation using a species distribution
model derived from locality records and environmental data. The results indicate that range reduction and
fragmentation occurred in southern Africa during Pleistocene cold phases (glacial maxima) with
subsequent range expansion during warmer interglacials. The spatial pattern of range fragmentation also
corresponds well with the geographic location of the common ancestor of each clade inferred from the
genetic data using a coalescent spatial diffusion model, further supporting the hypothesis of refugial
isolation. Interglacial expansion has resulted in secondary contact between refugial populations
(mitochondrial clade contact zones). Data from five anonymous nuclear loci reveal male-mediated gene
flow across these contact zones. However, the geographic extent of admixture varies considerably
between clades, suggesting varying periods of contact between different refugial populations. Overall, our
study reveals a complex history of refugial isolation and secondary expansion for puff adders in southern
Africa. Critically, although range contraction and isolation in widespread savannah mammals is thought to
have occurred during warm interglacials, in southern Africa the sympatric puff adder shows the opposite
pattern of range contraction during cooler glacial periods.




                                                                                                        41
Barnes, Cody (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Little Rock, AR, United States)

Digestive energetics in plethodontid salamanders

For over a century, specific dynamic action (SDA) has been extensively researched in a wide variety of
taxa. Yet to date no attempts to quantify the postprandial up-regulation of metabolism in plethodontid
salamanders have been pursued. Our study is the first to quantify and compare the SDA response in a
montane endemic lungless salamander and its lowland congener (Plethodon ouachitae and P. albagula,
respectively). Metabolic performance curves were fit for the SDA response of each species measured at
10ºC. Interspecific differences were not detected in the standard metabolic rate, peak, or time to peak.
However, the duration of the SDA response and the overall energy expended in SDA differed between
species. In addition, patterns observed in both species were substantially lower than in ambystomatids
and other taxa. The further reduced investment in SDA by P. albagula could pose a mechanism driving
the occupation of a larger distribution range and reflect physiological tradeoffs in the montane endemic.



Bart, Hank (Tulane University Museum of Natural History);

Fish collections as a resource for cyber-enabled discovery and innovation

Images of specimens from natural history collections are increasingly being used in scientific research.
Some of this research (cybertaxonomy) aims to increase the traditionally slow pace of new species
discovery and taxonomic description. A collaborative research project funded by the U.S. National
Science Foundation is using 2-D and 3-D images of specimens from the Royal D. Suttkus Fish Collection
to develop a computer-based species recognition and taxonomic diagnosis system. In one component of
the project machine learning techniques are being used to train a computer algorithm to select features
from images of specimens useful for distinguishing one collection of specimens from other known
taxonomic groupings.    A second component of the project involves using novelty (outlier) detection to
distinguish unknown species from known species. This interdisciplinary research project is an example of
technology and innovation at the crossroads of biology and computer science.



Bastiaans, Elizabeth (University of California, Santa Cruz);

Color morphs in an incipiently speciating lizard: from polymorphism to interpopulation
divergence

When different environments favor different reproductive strategies, the presence of alternative
reproductive tactics within populations may accelerate speciation by decreasing gene flow between them.
Many lizard species exhibit genetically based polymorphisms in color patches used in sexual signaling,
and often they are linked to alternative reproductive tactics. The presence and/or frequencies of color
morphs often vary between populations of the same or closely related species, providing ideal systems in
which to examine links between behavioral polymorphism and speciation. The karyotypically diverse
mesquite lizard (Sceloporus grammicus) species complex may represent a case of incipient speciation.
Robertsonian fissions have produced eight chromosome races whose diploid numbers range from 32 to
46, and several hybrid zones have been described between neighboring populations belonging to
different chromosome races. I will describe intrapopulation color polymorphisms and associated
alternative male and female reproductive tactics in the S. grammicus complex, variation between




                                                                                                       42
populations in the presence and frequencies of color morphs, and the behavioral characteristics
associated with the morphs. Several populations of the S. grammicus species complex exhibit
orange/blue/yellow throat color polymorphisms in males, similar to those previously shown to correspond
to ―rock-paper-scissors‖ strategies that cycle under negative frequency dependent selection in the side-
blotched lizard (Uta stansburiana).        Other populations of the S. grammicus complex exhibit
orange/white/yellow polymorphisms, and contact zones between populations with each polymorphism
correspond, in some cases, to hybrid zones between chromosome races. I will discuss the phylogenetic
context in which these polymorphisms occur and relate them to previously documented karyotypic
variation.



Bates, Michael (National Museum, Bloemfontein); Broadley, Donald (Natural History Museum,
Bulawayo, Canada); Barlow, Axel; Wuster, Wolfgang (Bangor University, Canada); Tolley, Krystal (South
African National Biodiversity Institute, Canada)

Taxonomy and distribution of the African egg-eating snakes of the genus Dasypeltis

Carl Gans (1959, 1964) conducted detailed studies of morphological variation in the pan-African egg-
eating snake genus Dasypeltis. His taxonomic conclusions were conservative however, and he
recognized only six species: D. scabra, D. palmarum, D. inornata, D. fasciata, D. medici (two subspecies)
and D. atra. Since then large collections of Dasypeltis from throughout the continent have accumulated in
various museums. In 2006 Trape & Mané reviewed the genus in West Africa and described three new
species: D. confusa, D. sahelensis and D. gansi (two subspecies); and another new species from this
area is currently being described (S. Trape pers. comm.). We have initiated morphology-based revisions
of Dasypelis in the W half of Southern Africa, E half of Southern Africa, central Africa, and NE Africa &
SW Arabia. A separate molecular phylogenetic study (mitochondrial and nuclear genes) has now been
extended to provide pan-African coverage of the genus. Where possible we have used both
morphological and genetic data to resolve taxonomic problems. Preliminary phylogenetic results indicate
that apart from the basal species D. medici, there are two distinct Dasypeltis clades: 1) populations from
W, SW and central Africa (D. s. loveridgei, and sister species D. palmarum and D. confusa), and 2)
remaining species analysed so far (D. inornata, D. scabra, and sister species D. fasciata and D. atra). D.
scabra in Southern Africa consists of three clades, with two possible new species. Molecular and
morphological data indicate that D. s. loveridgei of Namibia and adjacent regions in SW Africa, currently
considered a synonym of D. scabra, is in fact a distinct species sympatric with the latter in north-central
Namibia. Populations in S Namibia and N Cape of South Africa, as well as NW Namibia and SW Angola,
respectively, appear to represent new subspecies of ―D. loveridgei‖. A morphology-based revision of
Dasypeltis in NE Africa & SW Arabia confirms the validity of D. abyssina, a species with unusual dorsal
and ventral colour patterns, and high ventral counts, and identifies a new subspecies of D. abyssina from
Ethiopia, Eritrea and the Arabian Peninsula. Distribution ranges of the various taxa have been mapped
and will be illustrated. Although previously considered restricted to W Africa, D. confusa is widely
distributed through central Africa to Uganda and as far south as S Angola; while D. atra extends from S
Tanzania to central Ethiopia and westwards into E DRC.




                                                                                                        43
Batista, Abel (Senckenberg Institute);

Amphibian and Reptiles of eastern Panama: results of recent explorations.

Eastern Panama is recognized as an important biodiversity hotspot due to its great variety of habitat, high
endemism, and fast habitat loss. The diversity of ecosystems within this region makes it an interesting
place to study its fauna, especially in unexplored places and those which some herpetologists visited
many decades ago. The conservation status of many endemics and rare species in this region remain
unknown. Now Panamanian scientists and national authorities have emphasised the urgency of surveys
to determine conservation strategies for the herpetofauna in this region. During July to December 2011, I
went to the mountain ranges of Maje, Pirre, Jingurudo, Filo del Tallo and Cerro Sapo in Eastern Panama.
I did an integrative approach to assess the biodiversity of the eastern Panamanian herpetofauna using
molecular genetics, GIS, morphology, bioacustics (in the case of anurans), and ecological aspects.
During opportunistic searches at night I found 88 species of amphibians and 66 species of reptiles. These
results include new records for the region and data about the abundance status of some endangered
species (e.g., Atelopus spp ., Strabomantis spp.). Throughout the integrative approach I detected the
presence of cryptic and candidate species of the genera Bolitoglossa, Colotethus, Craugastor,
Diasporus, Ecnomiohyla, Lepidoblepharis, Pristimantis (Pristimantis cruentus species group), and
Silverstoneia. Also, I obtained interesting findings of rare and endangered species as Atelopus certus, A.
glyphus, Bolitoglossa cuna, Anolis latifrons , Imantodes phantasma, Pristimantis adnus, P ristimantis
moro, P ristimantis pirrensis and Ptychoglossus myersi. I recorded for the first time the advertisement
call of the recently described species Pristimantis adnus . This new findings are considered as a relevant
contribution to the knowledge of the area's herpetofauna. However, many areas still remain unexplored,
and a detailed assessment of the species status is urgently required.



Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University); Feldman, Anat (Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel); Das, Indraneil
(Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia); Khela, Sonia (Zoological Society of
London, London, United Kingdom); Itescu, Yuval; Meiri, Shai (Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel)

Distribution patterns of Indian reptiles and their environmental and phylogenetic correlates

The herpetofauna of India is highly diverse and exhibits high levels of endemism. However, until recently
it was extremely difficult to obtain an accurate overview of patterns of diversity due to a lack of vouchered
records and the prevalence of taxonomic problems in many groups. An increase in the number of reliable
sight and photo-vouchered records obtained by many active field herpetologists in India, coupled with the
resolution of at least some major taxonomic issues, has made reliable estimates of species distributions
possible for the first time. We developed maps for more than 450 terrestrial and freshwater species of
reptiles occurring in India. We analyzed species richness at a scale of one degree grid cells with respect
to a diversity of environmental correlates, including median annual temperature, median annual
precipitation, net primary productivity, mean elevation, and range in elevation (difference in height above
sea level between the highest and lowest point in each cell). Overall reptile richness increased with
increasing temperature, range in elevation, and precipitation. The model incorporating these variables
explains ~30% of the variation (not corrected for spatial autocorrelation). Turtle diversity was positively
correlated with precipitation and negatively so with elevational range. Lizard richness increased with
increasing temperature, and range in elevation, but was negatively associated with net primary
productivity and was uncorrelated with precipitation. Snake richness increased with all variables
considered, with the model considerably better than that for lizards or turtles, explaining 45% of the
variation. Both lizard and snake richness peak in South India, particularly in the Western Ghats, but
snakes are also very rich in Northeast India, as are turtles. Other areas of high diversity and endemism



                                                                                                          44
are the Eastern Ghats and the Western Himalayas, in contrast to the Deccan Plateau, Central Highlands,
and much of the Gangetic Plain. Substrate requirements, such as soil type or rock crevice availability,
limit particular clades of reptiles to certain geographic regions and the current and historical distribution of
these probably accounts for much of the variation in spatial diversity not explained by standard
environmental models. Uropeltid snakes and Cnemaspis geckos are examples of such taxa for which
distribution is strongly linked to phylogeny and historical biogeography.

Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University); Heinecke, Matthew; Jackman, Todd (Villanova University, Villanova,
PA, United States)

Substrate-mediated endemism in southern African geckos

Southern Africa has a rich lizard fauna, within which gekkonid geckos are a dominant group. High
species-richness in geckos is associated with substrate-specificity which, in conjunction with the complex
geological history of the subcontinent, has resulted in extensive cladogenesis and narrow endemism in
most rupicolous species. Phylogenetic analyses of each of several major clades of southern African
geckos: the Pachydactylus group (Pachydactylus, Rhoptropus, Colopus, Chondrodactylus,
Elasmodactylus), Goggia and Afroedura recovered well-resolved trees with most branches receiving
significant support. Divergence timing and diversification analyses reveal that an increase in the rate of
speciation in the most species- rich genus, Pachydactylus, was associated with a shift from terrestriality to
rock-living in the late Oligocene to early Miocene. Rupicoly is ancestral in both Goggia and Afroedura.
Basal lineages in these two taxa are present in the southwestern Cape of South Africa where several
species of Pachydactylus also occur, but their chief diversification has been in the temperate Cape Fold
Mountains (Goggia) and along the Eastern Escarpment and into the Eastern Cape (Afroedura), where
Pachydactylus is poorly represented. Conversely, Pachydactylus and its related genera have their
greatest diversity in the arid regions of the Northern Cape and Namibia, where the other genera are
represented by only two species each. The approximately contemporaneous diversification of these
genera suggests that ecological interactions between them may have contributed to their largely
complementary distributions.



Bautista, Jeremiah (Cal State University Northridge);

Reproductive biology of the barred sand bass, Paralabrax nebulifer of Southern California

Years of intense fishing pressure has caused the fishery of the barred sand bass, ( Paralabrax nebulifer)
of southern California to decline precipitously in the first decade of the 21st century.This species forms
large aggregations during their summer spawning season have left them vulnerable to fishermen who
remove them by the tens of thousands each summer. Commercial fishing has been prohibited since the
1950‘s, but the increasing popularity of this sport fish and relative ease of capture has drawn in thousands
of anglers annually. Specifically this proposed study into the reproductive biology of barred sand bass
aims to 1) document, for the first time, the gonado-somatic index (GSI) for both male and female for a full
year, 2) determine fecundity for a wide size range of females, 3) investigate the possibility of a sexual
dimorphic trait in the eye crest morphology, size, and coloration, and 4) up date the age assessment for
fishery management related issues. Understanding the reproductive cycles and the duration of energy
allocation towards reproduction is important for the proper management of this fishery.            Historically,
barred sand bass have played a prominent role in the recreational fishing industry of southern California
and must be protected and properly managed to prevent further decrease in the stocks, the loss of
genetic diversity, the shifting of size and sex classes, and the ultimate collapse of the fishery.




                                                                                                             45
Baxter-Gilbert, James (Laurentian University); Lesbarrères, Daivid; Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian
University, Canada)

On the road again: measuring the effectiveness of mitigation structures for reducing reptile road
mortality

Many reptile populations are negatively impacted by roads, especially because seasonal migratory
movements increase individual encounters with traffic. The Highway 69/400 corridor, connecting southern
and northern Ontario, runs along the eastern Georgian Bay Coast, one of Canada‘s richest areas of
reptile biodiversity. A section of new 4-lane highway has been designed to include mitigation structures (
e.g., eco-passages, fences) intended to lessen the detrimental effects this major roadway poses to
numerous Species-at-Risk (SAR) reptiles. Using a Before-After-Control-Impact-Paired (BACIP) study
design, we will quantify reptile road mortality present on the existing, non-mitigated 2-lane highway (in
spring and summer 2012) and compare it to mortality on the new, mitigated 4-lane highway (in spring and
summer 2013). In both years of the study, a control site without any mitigation measures will also be
monitored. If the exclusion structures ( e.g., fences) of the new highway are effective, animals should be
prevented from accessing the road and we should therefore observe a reduction in road mortality. Radio
telemetry and wildlife cameras will be used to monitor reptile movements around and under the road via
population connectivity structures ( e.g., eco-passages). Additionally, a ―willingness to utilize‖ experiment
will be conducted, which will assess turtle behaviour in response to the eco-passage. If the population
connectivity measures are effective, movements between habitats on either side of road, and use of the
eco-passages are expected. Conclusions drawn from our study will allow development of
recommendations for future road mitigation structures to reduce road mortality, and counteract the
decline of reptile biodiversity.



Beachy, Christopher (Minot State University); Beachy, Hyla (Jim Hill Middle School, Minot, ND, United
States)

The effect of temperature on post-maturation metamorphosis in western Tiger Salamanders,
Ambystoma mavortium

The western tiger salamander (Ambystoma mavortium) exhibits facultative paedomorphosis throughout
many parts of its range (western North America). Like other western tiger salamander populations,
growth is very rapid and individuals can attain large sizes (>100 mm SVL) in their first summer of life. In
North Dakota, populations are completely metamorphic when ponds are ephemeral (and can reach high
tempetures), completely paedomorphic in deep cattle ponds that always have water and do not freeze
completely (and are always cool), and are mixed metamorphic/paedomorphic in larger shallow lakes that
dry periodically (e.g., once every 10-20 years). We hypothesized that temperature variation among these
types of habitats is a significant cause of life cycle variation. We collected 20 salamanders using minnow
traps from flooded Agsite Pond in Ward County in northwestern North Dakota. This site is characterized
by a mixed population of paedomorphic and metamorphic salamanders. We tested two hypotheses: (1)
metamorphosis is temperature dependent and (2) metamorphosis is dependent on maturation status. We
placed large (>85 mm SVL) larvae in individual boxes and placed 10 larvae in a cooler at 15 degrees C
and 10 larvae in a cooler at 20 degree C. 7 of high temperature larvae metamorphosed, while 1 low
temperature larvae metamorphosed. In addition, the propensity to metamorphose was contingent on
maturation status: large larvae that were already sexually mature were less likely to metamorphose.




                                                                                                          46
Beamer, David (Nash Community College); Lamb, Trip (East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, United
States)

A comprehensive, range-wide molecular phylogenetic survey of the dusky salamanders
(Desmognathus)

The dusky salamanders ( Desmognathus ) constitute a large, species-rich group, and while a
considerable body of literature addressing systematic relationships and adaptive trends exists, these
issues have heretofore been approached in piecemeal fashion.           A few recent, seminal papers have
substantially revised our understanding of the diversity contained within this lineage and its tempo and
direction of adaptive divergence. Tilley & Mahoney (1996) revealed considerable cryptic species level
divergence within mountain duskies; Titus & Larson (1996) presented data which completely reversed
former hypotheses regarding the direction of adaptive trends in the genus; Chippindale et al. (2004)
provided strong evidence for a reversal in reproductive mode within the Desmognathus lineage; and
most recently, the work of Kozak et al. (2005), which has highlighted that Desmognathus is more lineage
rich than previously believed. All of these have served to demonstrate how complex the evolutionary
history of Desmognathus is, and taken together, these works manifest a need for more sampling in
areas and within lineages that have thus far been sparsely evaluated. We designed and carried out a
sampling regimen that focuses on level iv ecoregion X independent river drainages. We sampled over
600 populations across the distribution of all described dusky salamander ( Desmognathus ) species and
DNA sequence data was collected for each population. A Bayesian phylogenetic reconstruction of mtDNA
reveals more than fifty independent evolutionary lineages; for exemplars of each mtDNA lineage we
sequenced three nuclear-encoded regions.           We analyzed this dataset with several methods that
accommodate gene-tree heterogeneity to produce a Desmognathus species tree.



Beamer, David (Nash Community College);

The role of head shape evolution in an adaptive radiation of salamanders

Microhabitat partitioning amongst Desmognathus species involves a size component, with very large
species being aquatic and small species being terrestrial. However the mid-sized species range from
aquatic to terrestrial and some species demonstrate microhabitat shifts in different portions of their range
or when they are found sympatrically with congeners. I investigated head shape with size independent
geometric morphometric techniques.         A MANOVA of head shape variables found highly significant
differences between populations occupying different microhabitats.     Discriminant analysis was able to
correctly classify microhabitat based on the head shape variables 64% of the time. These results suggest
that head shape is correlated with microhabitat. Since lineages do not represent independent data points
I used independent contrasts to control for phylogeny and found a significant correlation between three of
the head shape variables and microhabitat.



Beard, Karen (Utah State University);

Founder effects haven't quieted them down: the coqui frog invasion in Hawaii

Introduced populations often exhibit divergence from their source populations as a result from novel
selection pressures, genetic drift caused by founder effects and bottlenecks, or both. The coqui frog,
native to Puerto Rico, invaded Hawaii, and experienced extreme founder effects. We studied variation in
body size and advertisement call parameters across elevational gradients in Puerto Rican and Hawaiian



                                                                                                          47
populations. We used common garden experiments to determine potential sources of variation in these
traits. In both Hawaii and Puerto Rico, body size followed Bergmann's rule, but body size was larger and
sexual dimorphism were greater in Puerto Rico than Hawaii. Calls correlated with elevation in both
Puerto Rico and Hawaii in the following ways: negative for fundamental frequency, positive with the
duration of each call, and negative with call rate, but there was less variation in these traits with elevation
in Hawaii than Puerto Rico. Across all populations in the laboratory, higher maternal temperatures
resulted in larger clutch sizes, smaller egg and offspring sizes, and shorter development periods. Higher
rearing temperatures resulted in smaller offspring size and shorter development periods. Frogs from
higher elevations in Puerto Rico but not Hawaii had faster growth rates and larger clutch sizes. In the
laboratory, we found the negative relationship between elevation and call frequency was best explained
by larger body sizes at higher elevations, and that the positive relationship between elevation and call
duration, and negative relationship between elevation and call rate were best explained by lower
temperatures at higher elevations. Our results suggest that Bergmann‘s clines in Puerto Rico may be
result from genetic differences among populations and plasticity in response to temperature. Alternatively,
in Hawaii, phenotypic plasticity in response to temperature likely explains the relatively small, but
potentially adaptive cline in body size with elevation. Founder effects from biased sampling of native
populations provide a mechanistic explanation for the reduced cline in body size. While individual frogs
are not louder in Hawaii than Puerto Rico, choruses may appear louder because densities can be higher.
Despite founder effects, the coqui is a widespread and highly abundant species in Hawaii and is reducing
invertebrate prey where it invades.



Beasley, Barbara (Association of Wetland Stewards for Clayoquot and Barkley Sounds);

Amphibian rite of passage: designing and testing the effectiveness of culverts for connecting
habitats in coastal British Columbia, Canada.

Western North America has lagged behind Europe, Britain and the eastern U.S. in addressing the threat
of roads to amphibians. We have installed very few mitigation structures, such as tunnels and barrier
fences, and conducted little follow-up monitoring to determine if these structures are effective in
connecting habitats and reducing road mortality. I measured amphibian movements along guiding fences
and through two different culverts at a site where five species of amphibians: Rana aurora , Pseudacris
regilla , Ambystoma gracile , Taricha granulosa and Plethodon vehiculum are frequently killed by
traffic. The culverts were 50 m apart at a peak crossing location along the Pacific Rim Highway, on
Vancouver Island, British Columbia. One culvert was a round corrugated metal (60 cm in diameter)
―drainage culvert‖, positioned to carry storm water under the road. The second culvert was a larger
rectangular concrete ―box culvert‖, half-filled with soil (180 cm x 45 cm final internal opening), and
positioned to provide an unflooded passageway for amphibians. Guiding fences were connected to the
tunnel entranceways and extended up to 60 m into the forest, angled away from the edge of the road.
Roadside barrier fences significantly reduced the number of amphibians, except P. regilla , killed on the
highway. I measured the effectiveness of each culvert as a connective passageway by (i) observing
amphibians inside the tunnel and at tunnel entranceways using time-lapse photography and (ii) counting
the number of marked amphibians recaptured in exit traps and along guiding fences as a proportion of the
number caught along corresponding sets of guiding fences on the opposite side of the road. With photos
and trapping, I detected R. aurora , A. gracile and, occasionally, T. granulosa moving through each
culvert, but not P. regilla and P. vehiculum . Recaptures of all species combined were higher at the ―box
culvert‖ (8% of 402 marked individuals) than the ―drainage culvert‖ (2% of 173) and twice as many
amphibians were photographed using the former (average 0.44 individuals per night). The ―box culvert‖
was better designed and better used as a crossing structure, however at a much lower rate than



                                                                                                            48
expected. Challenges with detectability and the presence of a mink predator are two possible
explanations for the low rate of use.



Beck, Daniel (Dept. of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University); Holcomb, Kerry (Central
Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States); Oliván Pliego, Jesús Eduardo (Facultad de
Ciencias Biológicas de la UAEM (Morelos), San Patricio, Jalisco, Mexico); Kiester, Ross (Turtle
Conservancy, New York, NY, United States); García Aguayo, Andrés (Instituto de Biología, U.N.A.M.,
San Patricio, Jalisco, Mexico)

Response of the Mexican beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum) to extreme seasonality in a tropical
dry forest

We investigated how the Mexican Beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum horridum ) manages the intense
seasonality of its tropical deciduous forest habitat. Tropical deciduous forests of western Mexico show
extreme seasonality, with a dry season lasting approximately 8 months (4 months in which virtually no
rain falls), followed by a 4-month wet season when 80% of mean annual precipitation occurs.
Specifically, we documented how the thermal and hydric heterogeneity of the tropical dry forest changes
from dry to wet season, and we explored how H. horridum h . responds to the abrupt changes brought on
by summer precipitation. We used implantable radiotransmitters to spatially track lizards, and
thermocron ibutton TM dataloggers to continuously record body temperatures at 15 minute intervals from
May through August 2011 (n = 6 lizards). We identified patterns of activity and refuge use by comparing
lizard body temperatures with concurrent environmental temperatures, and then tested for differences in
activity patterns and thermal biology between the dry and wet seasons. Variation in temperature and
humidity was much greater during the dry season, both spatially (along a 1000 m elevational gradient)
and temporally (day/night cycles). During the dry season (May and June) Beaded Lizards spent more
time (~90%) in refuges and significantly less time on the surface than during the wet season, yet
occasionally made extended above-ground forays. Beaded lizards showed more diurnal activity during
the dry season, with an interesting late-afternoon activity peak, despite exposure to significantly higher
temperatures and lower ambient humidity. During the wet season (July and August), beaded lizards
spent more time on the surface (42% wet season vs. 10% during the dry season), were active more
frequently (3+ bouts/wk wet season; vs. 1.5 bouts/week dry season), traveled farther, and showed lower
activity temperatures (mean = 27.5 C wet season vs 29.3 dry season) than during the dry season. These
differences represent behavioral and physiological responses to seasonal shifts in water and energy
availability, and may also reflect evolutionary responses to the thermal and hydric heterogeneity of the
tropical dry forest. Knowledge of responses by helodermatid lizards may help us understand the suite of
traits that are coadapted by other vertebrate ectotherms that inhabit highly-seasonal tropical arid
environments.



Bedore, Christine (Florida Atlantic University); Loew, Ellis (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States);
Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, United States)

Can batoids see in color? Multiple cones types are present in two batoid elasmobranchs

Elasmobranch fishes have adapted to nearly every marine environment, many of which are spectrally
distinct. Whereas the deep sea is light limited and consists of almost exclusively blue wavelengths, coral
reefs are among the most colorful environments on the planet. Elasmobranchs have evolved optimal
visual capabilities for their diverse spectral environments. The cownose ray ( Rhinoptera bonasus ) and




                                                                                                           49
the yellow stingray ( Urobatis jamaicensis ) are two batoid elasmobranchs that inhabit diverse spectral
habitats which likely reflect their potential for color discrimination. The cownose ray inhabits turbid, coastal
waters typically dominated by green wavelengths, whereas the yellow stingray inhabits coral reef
environments that are blue dominated, but spectrally diverse. Therefore, the yellow stingray is more likely
to be capable of color vision than the cownose ray. Additionally, ultraviolet (UV) light is present in both
environments, so it is possible that one or both species possess the ability to see UV wavelengths. The
maximum absorbance of photoreceptors from two individuals of each species was analyzed using
microspectrophotometry (MSP). Both rays possessed rod-dominated retinas with a λ max near 500nm
(green), but differed in the number of photopigments. The yellow stingray had three distinct cone types
with maximal absorbance in blue (475nm), green (533nm), and yellow (562nm) regions of the visible
spectrum whereas the cownose ray had two distinct cone types with maximal absorbance in blue
(470nm) and yellow (551) regions. Neither species showed evidence for UV sensitivity in MSP analysis.
The light filtering effects of the ocular media (cornea and lens) were quantified by measuring transmitted
wavelengths of broad-spectrum white light (400-800nm) and UV rich light (<400nm). Both rays
transmitted visible light through the ocular media, however, most UV light was absorbed by the lens in
both species. Cownose rays blocked transmission of all wavelengths below 400nm, whereas yellow
stingrays transmitted some UV wavelengths, but absorbed all wavelengths below 385nm. Although both
rays possessed multiple cone types, it is likely that the two cone types in the cownose ray enhance
contrast detection, rather than function for color discrimination. Conversely, the trichromatic yellow
stingray likely possesses true color vision.



Beebee, Trevor (amphibian & reptile conservation);

Long-term monitoring and conservation of an amphibian (Bufo calamita) at the national level:
assessing trends and the impact of management

Natterjack toads Bufo calamita were always rare in Britain but declined by over 75% in the first half of the
20th century. Monitoring of the surviving populations began in the 1970s commensurate with
autecological research and proactive conservation management. Genetic studies based on samples from
all British breeding pond clusters were used to define at total of 13 populations and metapopulations. All
these sites have been monitored since about 1990 to record spawn string counts as estimators of
population size and metamorph emergence as an indicator of breeding success. Both aquatic and
terrestrial habitat management were also recorded. Overall there has been no significant change in the
number of natterjacks in Britain over the past 20 years although some regions have seen declines and
others increases. Evidence suggests that increasing the numbers of suitable ponds (shallow, ephemeral)
and keeping terrestrial habitat open by livestock grazing are the most successful management tools.
Even so, conservation management has thus far halted the overall national decline in Bufo calamita but
not yet reversed it.



Belasen, Anat (University of Michigan); Li, Binbin (University of Michigan, Canada); Chremou, Dimitra;
Pafilis, Panayiotis; Valakos, Evstratios (University of Athens, Canada); Foufopoulos, Johannes (University
of Michigan, Canada)

Thermal ecology in island populations of the Aegean wall lizard (Podarcis erhardii)

Global climate change has been impacting natural ecosystems globally, and is expected to lead to
numerous species extinctions. The effects are predicted to be particularly severe for populations that



                                                                                                             50
have been reduced and isolated through anthropogenic habitat fragmentation. Despite the worldwide
occurrence of both phenomena, we have only a poor understanding of how habitat fragmentation (and
the associated loss in genetic diversity) renders species susceptible to climate change. In this study, we
investigate how habitat fragmentation and the concomitant loss in genetic diversity affect the thermal
preferences of different populations of a model ectothermic organism. We take advantage of a well-
characterized, natural fragmentation process, during which land-bridge islands were formed by rising sea
levels in the Aegean Sea (Greece). These islands harbor relict populations of Aegean Wall lizards (
Podarcis erhardii , Lacertidae) which are very poor over-water dispersers and which have lost different
amounts of their original genetic diversity through drift.

We quantified aspects of thermal and physiological ecology in populations from one large, genetically
diverse baseline island, as well as two offshore islets. This allowed us to determine whether
environmental differences (on the large island) or genetic impoverishment (on the small islets) affect the
thermal and physiological ecology of the species. Although populations across the three islands did not
differ in mean or variance of field body temperatures, thermal tolerances, or in selected (―preferred‖)
temperatures, we did find significant differences in water loss rates corresponding to dryness of the
habitat. Our results suggest that loss of genetic diversity does not appear to affect these measures of
thermal ecology, while locally prevailing conditions do.



Bell, Ben D. (Victoria University of Wellington); Moore, Jennifer A. (Michigan State University, East
Lansing, United States)

Staying in place: extreme site fidelity in a threatened New Zealand frog

The threatened Maud Island frog Leiopelma pakeka (Anura: Leiopelmatidae) from New Zealand is
extremely long-lived, population studies on the island revealing longevity for some individuals of 35-40
years. This provided an opportunity to investigate the movements and ranges of individuals over many
years of life. We undertook mark-recapture studies on two 12x12m lowland forest plots (grid 1, grid 2) on
Maud Island, New Zealand, over 1976-2010. Given the time scale (decades) we found that Maud Island
frogs were highly sedentary, occupying a remarkably small individual range area (mean minimum convex
polygon area ± SE = 26.7 ± 2.2 m2, 95% kernel density estimate ± SE = 26.7 ± 1.3 m2). The mean
distances moved between the successive range centroids were also very small – on average the frogs
shifted their ranges only 1.3 m every 10 years, showing an extremely high level of site fidelity over a very
long timescale. The mean nearest neighbour distance was 0.63 m (range = 0 - 3.04 m). The mean ± SE
density from three years analysed was 0.35 ± 0.05 frogs/m2 for grid 1 and 0.88 ± 0.16 frogs/m2 for grid 2.
Mean home range size varied by sex and study plot, which may reflect different physiological
requirements, densities or habitats. Our long-term results represent some of the smallest, most stable
home ranges and most extreme site fidelity known for any vertebrate.



Bell, Katie (University of Victoria);

Does human presence affect stress physiology and defensive behaviour of urban snakes?

As humans exert a greater and greater influence on natural systems, their interactions with wildlife are
growing in importance and in number. Wild animals respond to the challenges of urban life in various
ways: some have characteristics that are readily compatible with human presence; some are stressed,
modify their physiology and behaviour, and adapt; and others do not adapt and suffer from continual



                                                                                                         51
stress, leading to reduced fitness and wellbeing. These varied responses can be both intra- and inter-
specific, and are well documented for birds and mammals. Less is currently known about reptiles. In this
study I will assess the effects of human presence on the stress physiology and defensive behaviour of
urban garter snakes in parks in the Greater Victoria area. I will sample blood from wild garter snakes to
infer baseline stress levels from leukocyte profiles and measure pre-capture flight behaviour of snakes, as
well as their defensive behaviour during handling and upon release. I predict that individuals that are
more stressed will flee sooner and react with more intense and frequent defensive displays. Results of
this study will provide insight into the relationship between the endocrine stress response and wariness in
urban garter snakes and contribute valuable knowledge about the consequences of urbanization for
reptiles.



Belleggia, Mauro (CONICET - UNMdP); Figueroa, Daniel (UNMdP, Canada); Sánchez, Felisa (INIDEP,
Canada); Bremec, Claudia (CONICET, Canada)

The diet of Mustelus schmitti; a comparison across decades

The diet of the narrownose smoothhound shark Mustelus schmitti was studied based on analysis of
stomach contents from two disparate time periods from specimens on the northern Argentinean
continental shelf (34 o S – 41 o S): The first set of specimens was collected from fifteen research cruises
carried out by INIDEP from 1986-1994, total length ranged between 250-1050 mm. The second set of
specimens was collected from eight research cruises from 2008-2011, total length ranged between 250-
1050 mm. Prey items were identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level, counted and weighted. For
comparisons, %IRI and the new %PSIRI were calculated. The hypothesis that the consumption of each
prey group is determined by intrinsic (total length, sex, maturity) and extrinsic factors (region, season,
period) was assessed by fitting generalized linear models (GLMs). Of the 1009 stomachs analyzed during
the older period, 902 (89.39%) contained prey items. On the other hand, of a total of 959 stomachs
sampled during the contemporary period, 944 (98.43%) contained food. Only the stomachs containing
prey were analyzed further. The stomach contents of the narrownose smoothhound M. schmitti indicate
opportunistic foraging behavior. The specimens caught between 1986 and 1994 fed mostly on Brachyura
crustaceans (65.53%), followed by polychaetes (13.42%) and fishes (12.23%). The diet of those animals
caught between 2008 and 2011 was composed mainly of polychaetes (38.12%) and Brachyura
crustaceans (30.64%), followed by fishes (17.82%). Hermit crabs were rare during the older period
(0.08%) but become more frequent during the recent years (7.38%). The trophic level is the position of an
organism within the food web; it ranged between 3.76-3.92 during the older period and between 3.59-3.75
during the contemporary period.



Bello Bruzzi Lion, Ana Herminia (University of Brasília);

Modeling the potential distribution area of the endemic lizard Liolaemus lutzae under two different
climatic scenarios

The lizard Liolaemus lutzae, one of five species endemic to Brazilian Restingas, is considered a
vulnerable (IUCN) and a threatened species (IBAMA). In 1986, Araujo and colleagues introduced 51
individuals of a population from Praia de Barra de Maricá, Rio de Janeiro state, into an area not originally
occupied by this species in Praia das Neves, Espírito Santo state, to found a new colony and test its
viability.




                                                                                                          52
Introduced species are known to influence the structure and function of invaded ecological communities.
However, this specific introduction does not seem to be harmful, because the environments and lizard
communities are similar between Barra de Maricá and Praia das Neves. Despite the similarity between
the two areas, they are separated by the Paraíba do Sul river, a putative geographic barrier that prevents
the dispersal of L. lutzae to the north. We used ecological niche modeling to estimate the potential
geographic distribution of Liolaemus lutzae and investigate the suitability of Praia das Neves for
supporting the species. Distribution data were obtained from the literature, scientific collections and from
surveys. Ecological niche models were developed using Maximum Entropy (Maxent). Potential niches at
the present time were modeled using current conditions, and the potential distribution in 2080 was
modeled assuming a pessimistic outlook of environmental conditions at that time. Bioclimatic data were
obtained from the WorldClim dataset to establish which climate factors are important in determining the
distributional pattern of this species. The resulting map shows that Praia das Neves is a potential area of
occurrence for L. lutzae in the present and in the future analysis. The estimates of relative contributions
of the environmental variables to the Maxent model showed that altitude and temperature seasonality
were responsible for the 61.5% and 17.4% respectively model explanation. Praia das Neves is a potential
area of distribution for this species, which suggests that their introduction did not threaten the established
biological community. In contrast, this introduction can be seen as a conservation management tool. The
variables that contributed significantly for Maxent are in concordance with the spatial requirements of L.
lutzae. As it lives at the coast, areas at an altitude close to zero (sea level) and with a stable temperature
during the year are appropriate for the species. Although the Maxent model adequately captures the
potential distribution of this species, the future analysis would be improved if the bioclimatic data included
sea level variables. Given the species distribution relative to the coast, any sea level fluctuations caused
by global warming would threaten established populations and completely change the potential niche
distribution for Liolaemus lutzae.



Bello Soares, Ana Hermínia (University of Brasilia); Tedeschi, Leonardo (University of Brasilia,
Canada); Moser, Pamela (University of Brasília, Canada)

Tadpole ecomorphology in a region between Amazon forest and Cerrado in western Brazil.

The distribution richness and abundance of amphibians are associated with structural and microclimatic
habitat characteristics. Regarding tadpoles, resource competition, predation and degree of permanence
of water are factors that influence the occurrence of species in specific microhabitats. Here we explored
the relationship between the use of microhabitats and morphology of tadpoles. The study was carried out
at Ribeirão Cascalheira, MT in Brazil. Tadpoles were sampled with hand nets in 23 ponds of different
sizes and variable degrees of permanence. In each pond we recorded the water temperature, water
depth and substrate type. Tadpoles were identified to species level, and morphometric measures were
taken from them. The relationships between tadpole richness and environmental descriptors were
observed in a PCA. We performed a MANOVA to investigate the relationship of species abundance and
richness with environmental characteristics of the ponds. In total, we collected 993 individuals from six
species in four families. The abundance was higher in shallow pools and species richness was greater in
deep ponds. In terms of morphology there was no significant difference between families in relation to
habitat. The first principal component of the PCA explained 69% of the difference between larger and
smaller individuals. The analysis of the relationship between microenvironments showed that permanent
ponds had greater water depth, while temporary ponds showed higher water temperature. The species
richness increased with the mean water depth. However, the most rich ponds did not contain all species.
Therefore, ephemeral ponds are also important, given that we found that some species are exclusive to
such habitats.



                                                                                                           53
Benard, Michael (Case Western Reserve University);

Genetic differences in activity between dispersing and non-dispersing wood frogs affect
ecological interactions.

Studies of ecological interactions often assume that variation among individuals in phenotype and
genotype does not affect the outcome of these interactions. For example, theoretical and empirical
studies of metapopulations and local adaptation often assume that there are no differences between
dispersing and non-dispersing individuals. I investigated this assumption and its consequences using two
experiments on wood frogs (Rana sylvatica). In the first experiment, I compared the offspring of adult
males that had dispersed to new ponds (dispersers) with the offspring of adult males that remained at
their home pond (non-dispersers). The offspring of dispersers were significantly more active compared to
the offspring of non-dispersers. In the second experiment, I tested whether genetic differences in activity
interacted with density to affect competition and resource use. Genetic differences in activity did not
interact with density. However, wood frog tadpoles from high-activity families had a stronger negative
effect on algal growth than tadpoles from low-activity families. These results demonstrate that, in contrast
to a key assumption of many models of metapopulation dynamics and local adaptation, genetic
differences among individuals can be strong enough to affect ecological interactions. This has important
implications for population dynamics and conservation planning.



Benavides, Edgar (Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University); Dornburg, Alex
(Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, Canada); Sites Jr., Jack W. (Dept. of
Integrative Biology and M. L. Beam MUseum. Brigham Young University, Canada)

Disentangling phylogenetic patterns from historical demography - lessons from an atypically
distributed lizard genus

Specific information about the geographic distribution of any taxon at a biome scale is one important
avenue to understand the patterns and sometimes the processes leading to evolutionary divergence.
Seldom a case is presented in which two portions of the same genus is distributed in very distinct
geographic layouts. In Microlophus (Iguanid: Tropidurinae) two monophyletic sister species groups are
arranged in two disparate distributions that include the narrow Peru-Chile Coastal Desert (PCCD) (
peruvianus group) and the Galapagos Archipelago (Western Galapagos Radiation; Benavides et al.
2009). The most notable feature of the Peru-Chile Coastal Desert is landscape and climate continuity.
No major geographical barriers exist that could inform a priori hypotheses in relation to patterns of
species diversification within the peruvianus group. The lack of geographic barriers suggests a past
history signed by episodic gene flow and recurrent isolation. In contrast, Galapagos Islands most notable
feature is geographical isolation and the existence of clear oceanographic barriers among islands, which
should likely promote genetic divergence in a scenario of isolation without migration. In this contribution,
we take advantage of these two geographic layouts to assess their influence on the patterns of genetic
divergence in Microlophus by comparing the effect of genetic divergence mediated by isolation versus
genetic divergence with gene flow. More specifically, we combine the use of a modern coalescent-based
multi-locus genus phylogeny with a dense mtDNA locus population sampling to: (1) establish a time-
scaled outline of cladogenic events; and (2) to contrast alternative modes of lineage divergence within
these two groups.




                                                                                                         54
Bennett, Amanda (Trent University); Murray, Dennis (Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada)

Carryover effects of phenotypic plasticity between embryonic and larval response to predation
risk in two species of frog (Lithobates spp.)

 Organisms exhibit phenotypic plasticity in response to predation risk when predator abundance is
variable and defense mechanisms are energetically costly. For species with complex life histories, such
as amphibians, costs of early plasticity may be manifested only by a lack of response to risk in later life
stages. We looked for costs of early plasticity, and predicted that plastic response to larval predators
(dragonfly larvae, Aeshna spp.) during embryonic development will result in a lack of response to similar
risk in the larval environment for Northern leopard ( Lithobates pipiens ) and wood frog ( L. sylvaticus )
tadpoles. Eggs may respond to larval predation risk by delaying hatching and emerging at a larger, more
advanced size, whereas tadpoles may respond by either decreasing activity, increasing relative tail depth
or growth rates, or accelerating time to metamorphosis. Leopard frog eggs exposed to predation risk
increased hatching synchrony and size at hatch, and predator-naïve tadpoles showed a response to
predation risk in the larval environment by lowering activity levels and accelerating growth. Leopard frog
tadpoles conditioned to odonate predators as eggs did not reduce activity and showed no change in
morphology, growth or development rates. Wood frogs eggs also increased hatching synchrony,
however, tadpoles reduced activity and developed deeper tail fins when exposed to predation risk in the
larval environment regardless of embryonic treatment. Both wood and leopard frog tadpoles exposed to
predators as eggs increased activity levels above those of controls when predators were removed,
suggesting a possible mechanism by which the growth/predation risk trade-off can be resolved. We found
a carryover effect of early plastic response in leopard frogs, however, the absence of a commensurate
response by wood frogs despite a similar embryonic response to predation risk may relate to different
selective pressures on life history stages in their natural environment.



Bentley, Andrew (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute); Beach, Jim (University of Kansas
Biodiversity Institute, Lawrence, KS, United States)

Specify 6: New innovative approaches to collection data entry and data storage.

Specify is a biological database application for museums and herbaria which processes specimen
information for computerizing holdings, manages collection management transactions, and mobilizes
species occurrence data to the web. Specify 6, is a wholly-new implementation coded in Java and
designed to run identically on all three workstation environments--Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux.
Specify versions for each platform (and the source code which is offered under an open source license
agreement) are available at no cost from the Project web site –specifysoftware.org. The Project is
supported by the US NSF and the University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute. Specify 6 incorporates
many significant changes, from its intuitive and highly-usable drag-and-drop user interface to many new
functions and capabilities designed to streamline routine collections data tasks while preparing and
validating data for biodiversity community networks. Specify 6 has numerous enhancements over
previous versions, including support for using record sets as subsets of the complete catalog for various
types of processing, such as: georeferencing, label and report production, and importing and exporting
records. Specify 6‘s data model has been expanded and enriched to provide robust support for multiple
collections within a single database, DNA information, field notebook information, file attachments,
GUIDs, data entry and uploads through the Specify WorkBench and Excel, collecting trip data, repository
agreements, accession logging, conservation treatments, collection object containers, and many more
collections data issues. The Specify 6 form system is highly customizable, and Specify 6 comes with a




                                                                                                        55
robust label and report generator. The most important core advance with Specify 6 however, in addition
to its long list of capability enhancements, is the program‘s modular architecture designed for functionality
plug-ins and co-development collaborations. With the availability of specialized plug-in modules, Specify‘s
research capabilities will be extendedby online web-service links to other biodiversity data research
community servers. Specify‘s soul as an open-source, internet-capable, integration platform will transform
biological collections computing. This presentation will highlight Specify 6 and illustrate some of its
innovative features.



Berger, Lee (James Cook University); Skerratt, Lee; Cashins, Scott; Grogan, Laura; Webb, Rebecca
(James Cook University, Canada); Philips, Annie (DPIPWE, Canada); Murray, Kris; Speare, Rick (James
Cook University, Canada)

Mitigating Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Australia

The first record of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) in Australia is from a frog collected in 1978 on
the central east coast near Brisbane. This fungus spread slowly north and possibly south over the next 2
decades, and was carried over to the west coast in 1985. In 2006 a national Threat Abatement Plan
(TAP) was published outlining research and actions to 1) decrease the risk of spread, and 2) decrease
the impact on infected populations. A review of the TAP in 2012 revealed that advances have been
achieved in addressing these objectives. Mapping and modeling have shown that Bd has spread to most
areas of suitable climate and habitat, with the exception of the Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage
Area, which was identified as a key area where naïve species are at risk from Bd incursion. There is
currently no proven means of stopping natural spread but we have shown that disinfectants in use for
other introduced diseases are effective against Bd. However, the efficacy of current biosecurity protocols
remains to be assessed. Diagnostic testing techniques have been optimized and there is improved
understanding of the epidemiology and pathogenesis of chytridiomycosis. Current high priorities include
research into host resistance and in-field management, continued population monitoring, supporting
diagnostic and captive husbandry capacities, communication to targeted community members and
coordination of research and management. Intensive management is needed to prevent extinction of
species threatened by chytridiomycosis including the Australian corroboree frogs. Our current focus is to
improve survival rates through selecting for immunity and controlling host reservoirs, improving
surveillance and biosecurity, production of an emergency response plan, and identification and protection
of populations in suboptimal areas for the disease. The TAP has been a slow but useful framework for
establishing research and management.



Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Feldheim, Kevin
(The Field Museum of Natural History, Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution,
Chicago, IL, United States); Nemeth, Richard; Kadison, Elizabeth; Blondeau, Jeremiah (Center for Marine
and Environmental Studies, University of the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands, United
States); Semmens, Brice (USA Reef Environmental Education Foundation, Key Largo, FL, United
States); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute, Dania
Beach, FL, United States)

High Genetic Diversity and Connectivity of a Severely Overfished Nassau grouper Spawning
Aggregation in the US Virgin Islands

As a result of high levels of historical commercial and recreational fishing, the Nassau grouper
(Epinephelus striatus) has sustained widespread declines across its geographic distribution. Within US



                                                                                                          56
Virgin Islands waters, recognized spawning aggregations have declined to low levels; however, a
remnant spawning aggregation historically numbering over 1000 individuals at Grammanik Bank, St.
Thomas, has seemingly begun to recover since implementation of protective measures in 2005, and may
now comprise approximately 200 individuals. The genetic consequences of such dramatic aggregation
declines and incipient recovery are unknown. We report a genetic characterization of the St. Thomas
aggregation using 15 microsatellite loci developed specifically for E. striatus, and address the hypothesis
that the remnant population will show low genetic diversity and evidence of a genetic bottleneck. We
genotyped aggregated individuals comprising three successive spawning years (2008, n = 51, 2009, n =
93; and 2010, n = 78) as well as individuals collected from a relatively unfished aggregation inhabiting the
waters off Little Cayman, Cayman Islands (n = 54). Analyses indicate relatively high levels of genetic
diversity across all USVI collections (allelic richness, USVI = 10.50 – 11.47) and no difference was
detected among surveyed aggregation sites (allelic richness, Cayman Islands = 10.57). Genetic analyses
of temporal and spatial samples using the software BOTTLENECK 1.2.02 provided mixed support for a
genetic bottleneck. High levels of genetic connectivity was detected between surveyed spawning
aggregations (FST = -0.0004). As such, it is highly likely that gene flow from neighboring spawning
aggregations may be driving the recovery of the St. Thomas population and ultimately may be essential to
the continued persistence of this species.



Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Feldheim, Kevin
(The Field Museum of Natural History, Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution,
Chicago, IL, United States); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University, North Miami, FL, United
States); Wintner, Sabine (KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, N/A, South Africa); Wetherbee, Brad (University
of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, United States); Shivji, Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research Institute & Save
Our Seas Shark Center, Dania Beach, FL, United States)

Population genetic structure and evolutionary history of the tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) on a
global scale

The tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) is a globally distributed, migratory species inhabiting warm-temperate
and tropical waters. With their large size, generalist feeding habits and broad habitat distribution ranging
from coastal to pelagic environments, tiger sharks likely play an important role as apex predators in
marine ecosystems. Recent evidence indicates over-exploitation and population decline of this species in
some regions. We report on the global population structure and evolutionary history of tiger sharks
inferred from a combination of 10 nuclear microsatellite loci (n = 389 animals) and sequences of the
mitochondrial control region (mtCR) (1,068 bp; n = 349) and cytochrome oxidase I gene (642 bp; n =
152). Strong genetic differentiation was detected among western Atlantic and Indo-Pacific tiger sharks
with all three sets of genetic markers, with limited inter-basin mixing. However, some contrasting patterns
of intra-basin structure were detected across mitochondrial and nuclear markers, with mtCR sequences
generally indicating increased genetic partitioning within ocean basins. Tiger sharks from the Indian and
Pacific Ocean coasts of Australia were significantly differentiated based on mtCR but not nuclear
markers. Coalescent based analyses and mtCR sequence diversity estimates were largely congruent and
suggestive of an Indo-Pacific origin for tiger sharks, with subsequent colonization of the Atlantic Ocean
during the mid to upper Pleistocene via dispersal around South Africa. This work supports the
assessment and management of tiger sharks from the western Atlantic and Indo-Pacific separately, and
points to the need for further investigation of smaller-scale population structure within ocean basins.




                                                                                                         57
Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Horn, Rebekah
(1Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute, Dania Beach, FL, United States);
Chapman, Demian (School of Marine and Atmospheric Science & Institute for Ocean Conservation
Science, Stony Brook, NY, United States); Feldheim, Kevin (The Field Museum of Natural History,
Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution, Chicago, IL, United States); Brooks, Edd
(Shark Research and Conservation Program, N/A, Bahamas); Gore, Mauvis (Marine Conservation
International, N/A, United Kingdom); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey
Research Institute, Dania Beach, FL, United States)

The genetic population structure of the Caribbean reef shark (Carcharhinus perezi)

Ecological and community differences have been noted across coral reef ecosystems with varying levels
of anthropogenic intrusion, with striking declines of apex predator densities documented where human
presence has historically been the highest. Within western Atlantic waters, one of the most common
predators inhabiting coral reef ecosystems is the Caribbean reef shark (Carcharhinus perezi). Given the
vulnerability of this species to fisheries and its potentially important ecological role as an apex predator,
we assessed the overall genetic diversity and connectivity across its tropical western Atlantic distribution
using both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. Caribbean reef sharks demonstrated extremely low levels of
genetic diversity across all surveyed loci relative to all other shark species analyzed to date, which may
be due to a recent evolutionary origin. Nevertheless, nuclear microsatellite loci revealed population
structure between Brazilian sites and populations from The Bahamas and Caribbean Sea (FST > 0.0182;
P 0.05). In contrast, concatenated mitochondrial and mitochondrial/nuclear sequences revealed low but
significant genetic differentiation across most of the surveyed locations. These patterns may reflect either
historical patterns of dispersal or contrasting patterns of movement between male and female sharks.
Although tagging and tracking data suggest these animals typically exhibit strong site attachment, our
study reveals complex population structure with evidence supporting contemporary long distance mixing,
at least by males, which should be incorporated into management plans for this species.



Bertolatus, David (Metropolitan State College of Denver); Gangloff, Eric (Iowa State University,
Canada); Gagliardi-Seeley, PhD, Jennifer; Reigel, Chris (Metropolitan State College of Denver, Canada)

Sex and thermal conditions influence musking behavior in sympatric garter snakes (Thamnophis
spp.)

 Despite an abundance of studies documenting the antipredator and defensive behaviors of garter snakes
(genus Thamnophis ), only one study (in review) has quantitatively examined musking in free-ranging
snakes. Musking, or cloacal discharge, is a common defensive behavior across many snake taxa that
involves the release of foul-smelling compounds that render the snake unappetizing to potential
predators. Previously, we examined musking behaviors in two species of free-ranging snakes, the
western terrestrial garter snake ( T. elegans ) and the plains garter snake ( T. radix). We found that T.
radix musked significantly more often than T. elegans and that T. elegans increased musking
propensity with increased body condition. However, musking behavior was not correlated with size or
environmental factors. Currently, we are examining whether there is an influence of sex on musking
behavior in both T. radix and T. elegans . We expect females will musk more than males because
previous studies have identified that female musk glands are larger and the musk odor more pungent.
Furthermore, we plan to determine if musking behavior is associated with body temperature. We
hypothesize that warmer snakes musk more readily than cooler snakes, because previous research
shows that motor functions are directly correlated to body temperature in ectotherms. An examination of




                                                                                                          58
these antipredator behaviors in sympatric species will help illuminate the function, proximate causes, and
evolutionary significance of such behaviors.



Berven, Keith (Oakland University);

Density Dependence in the Aquatic Larval Stage of a Pond Breeding Amphibian: Does it exist?
Evidence from a 28-year Field Study

It is generally assumed that anuran larval survival, growth rates and developmental rates are density-
dependent. These assumptions are based on a large number of studies that have manipulated larval
densities in lab aquaria, field enclosures and semi-natural mesocosms. However, there are relatively few
studies of natural populations that validate the conclusions drawn from these lab and semi-natural
studies. Here I present the results of a 28-year study of larval survival and developmental patterns of
Wood Frogs (Rana sylvatica) from a single pond in Michigan. During the period of study (1985-2012)
juvenile frogs were produced in 24 years. Embryonic survival was generally high and varied little among
years. In contrast, initial larval densities in the pond varied by factor of 18. Larval mortality was highest
shortly after hatching (~ 14-21 days) followed by a period of relatively low but consistent decline in
survival (Type III survivorship). Annual larval survival varied dramatically among years, but was not
related to initial larval density. In contrast, metamorphic body size was negatively correlated with initial
larval density, while larval period was positively correlated with initial larval density. Larval period and
size were negatively correlated, and neither trait was related to pond temperature. Partial correlations
indicated larvae with longer development times had lower survival, while metamorphic size was
negatively correlated with larval survival. The patterns of survival and development observed in the field
were informed by a mesocsm study which varied larval density and the presence or absence of a
vertebrate or insect predator. In the absence of predators, tadpole survival, growth and development
were density dependent, however, because predators took a disproportionate number of prey at lower
larval densities, predators reversed the effects of larval density on survival, but not the effects of larval
density on larval body size or developmental time. In addition, larval survivorship curves from the
predator treatments conformed better to field survivorship curves than from mescosms without predators.
Together, these results suggest that the lack of density-dependent survival in the field may result from the
differential effects of predators at different larval densities.



Bevier, Catherine (Colby College);

Physiological correlates of calling behavior in anurans with different calling strategies

The advertisement call of male frogs is a familiar secondary sexual characteristic, and one of the most
energetically expensive behaviors to produce. Different species exhibit extraordinary variation in seasonal
and nightly patterns of calling activity. Males of some species call in choruses over prolonged periods and
persist for weeks or months, while others form choruses more opportunistically, for only a few days or
less. Males of some species may call for many hours over a 24 h period, while other species call only
briefly at night. I will draw on results from my research, and compare with those of colleagues, to show
how these patterns of behavioral variation are influenced by physiological characteristics of the males,
especially of the muscles that contribute to call production. For example, males able to call over longer
periods of time, on either a daily or seasonal basis, have a greater potential to attract and mate with a
female. However, males may be constrained over the calling period by the levels of energy substrates,
such as glycogen and lipid, available to fuel call production. Nightly and seasonal patterns of calling



                                                                                                          59
behavior may also be influenced by levels of corticosterone produced in response to the physiological
stress of this high level of activity. On a more immediate scale, female preference for a male is often
based on the dynamic properties of the male‘s call, such as call rate, and females of many species prefer
males that produce more energetically expensive calls. Call rate, call intensity, and call complexity, for
example, are traits influenced by the aerobic capacity of muscles used in call production, and vary
dramatically both within and among species. Interestingly, many of these correlated patterns transcend
phylogenetic relationships, and these physiological characters serve as a strong selective force on
behavioral capacity.



Bezerra, Karla (Universidade Federal do Piauí-TROPEN); Oliveira, Rômulo (Universidade Federal do
Piauí-Departmento de Biologia-CNN, Canada); Conceição, Esmeralda (Universidade Estadual do
Maranhão-Centro de Estudos Superiores de Caxias (CESC/UEMA), Canada); Lopes, João (Universidade
Federal do Piauí-TROPEN, Canada); Fraga, Elmary; Barros, Maria (Universidade Estadual do Maranhão-
CESC/Genbimol, Canada); Barros, Roseli (Universidade Federal do Piauí-TROPEN, Teresina, Brazil)

Molecular identification of Phyllomedusae (Anura, Hylidae) using COI DNA barcode in an area of
the Cerrado biome, in the state of Maranhão, northeast of Brazil

Hylidae has three subfamilies, among them Phyllomedusinae (Günther, 1858) have been investigated as
to their use as sources of drugs in tradicional folk medicine and modern medical science. Phyllomedusa
is the most diverse genus having a total of 32 species, 23 of these occurs in Brazil. However, there is
much discussion as to its taxonomic character. For the State of Maranhão records are scarce. The
objective of this study is to report the occurrence of two species of the genus by molecular data in a
Conservation Unit in the east of the State, city of Caxias. The Area of Environmental Protection
"Inhamum" (04 0 53' S and 43 0 24' W) has approximately 4,500 ha, in the Cerrado biome. From
March 2011 to March 2012 the specimens were obtained by active search at night in ponds and cerrado
sensu strictu phytophysiognomie between 18 and 23 hours by four collectors in a sampling effortof 180
hours /observers in three of the five breeding sites sampled. DNA was isolated using the protocol of
phenol-chloroform extraction. The amplification of the Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit I were performed by
PCR using specific primers. The products of PCRs were sequenced using the method didesoxiterminal in
3500 Genetic Analyzer (Life Techonologies). Sequences were aligned using Bioedit program and for
identification The Barcode of Life Data Systems (BOLD). A fragment of 600 bp of the COI gene was
obtained in 23 specimens of Phyllomedusa. It was possible to identify distinct species by 5S and COI
genes. Identification through the BOLD systems revealed the status specific of the specimens. According
to Frost ( 2011 ), P. hypochondrialis and P. bicolor occurs in the region. However, Bruschi et al. (2010)
using cytogenetic and molecular data suggests the occurrence of P. azurea in the savanna areas of the
State. Using morphological characters we suggest the classification of P. azurea and P. sp. for the
Conservation Unit. The molecular information obtained allowed the construction of a database, DNA
barcoding, for the species of Phyllomedusa from the area and may be useful for the definition of
taxonomic questions revealing an unambiguous identification of the Phyllomedusa species.




                                                                                                       60
Bickford, David (National University of Singapore);

Forest Fragment and Breeding Habitat Characteristics Explain Frog Diversity and Abundance in
Singapore

Habitat loss and fragmentation can have severe negative and irreversible effects on biodiversity. We
investigated the effects of forest fragmentation on frog diversity in Singapore because of its high rates of
deforestation and the demonstration that frogs are some of the most sensitive species to habitat
degradation. We surveyed frog species in 12 forest fragments varying from 11 to 935 ha. We compared
differences in species richness, abundance, and Shannon‘s index in relation to forest fragment size,
connectivity (distance between fragments), and breeding habitat heterogeneity. A total of 20 species from
12 genera and five families were encountered in 12 fragments. Larger fragments and those closer to
larger fragments had higher species richness. Abundance, however, was not correlated with forest area
or connectivity, but we found fewer individual frogs in the larger fragments. We also found that breeding
habitat heterogeneity best explained frog species diversity and abundance in forest fragments. Fragments
with a high diversity of breeding habitats had more species. We found no evidence to suggest that
abundance and diversity are strongly correlated, particularly in disturbed areas, but that breeding habitat
heterogeneity is an under-appreciated factor that should be considered when prioritizing areas for anuran
conservation. Enriching breeding habitat heterogeneity, creating corridors between fragments, and
reforesting degraded areas are some of the most beneficial strategies for preserving urban frog
biodiversity.



Bickford, David (National University of Singapore);

The ecology and evolution of the lungless frog, Barbourula kalimantanensis

The only lungless frog, Barbourula kalimantanensis, was recently rediscovered in Kalimantan, on
Indonesian Borneo. Here we review aspects of its highly modified morphology and ecology, as well as
some aspects of the evolutionary lineage that gave rise to this strange frog.

The species has strict habitat restrictions, only found in very fast flowing cold water in the lowlands. With
recent severe habitat degradation and loss, the IUCN conservation status of the species was recently
changed from Vulnerable to Endangered, earmarking the species as a conservation flagship for the
region and for Indonesia. The genus is also surprisingly old, currently the oldest estimated cladogenetic
event that produced extant endemic species to Southeast Asia.



Bielby, Jon (Institute of Zoology, ZSL); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC,
Canada); Fisher, Matthew (Imperial College, Canada); Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, ZSL,
London, United Kingdom)

Stuff the envelope: temperature-associated mortality does not match the expectations of
laboratory estimates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis physiological requirements

Amphibian host/parasite interactions should be influenced by environmental temperature, and evidence in
support of this has been reported for chytridiomycosis. As a result, the use of climate envelope models to
describe risk of chytridiomycosis has become increasingly common. These models are predominantly
based on laboratory estimates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) physiological requirements and
therefore assume dynamics causing declines should occur at temperatures where Bd growth is optimal in



                                                                                                           61
the lab. Here we report a combination of field studies of Alytes obstetricans and a lab study of Bufo bufo
that show; 1) temperatures at which mortality occurs are not consistent, even in a single host species; 2)
lethal chytridiomycosis can result at temperatures where Bd is presumed not to grow and reproduce
effectively, and; 3) altering temperature for the host preceding exposure to Bd affects infection dynamics.
Taken together, our results strongly indicate that environmental temperature affects amphibian/Bd
host/parasite interactions in a highly context-dependent manner not fully described by lab estimates of Bd
physiological requirements. Ultimately, the environmental envelope for Bd is the amphibian, not the pond
or forest.



Bienentreu, Joe-Felix (Senckenberg Research Institute Frankfurt);

Taxonomy and phylogeography of the Anolis pachypus complex (Squamata: Iguania: Dactyloidae)

The monophyletic genus Anolis is a highly diverse lizard group, and with 384 described species the
largest vertebrate genus in the world. Intragenerically the species of the A. pachypus complex are
allocated to the Lemurinus group in the Beta-section. The members of the complex are extremely similar
to each other in terms of habitus, general appearance, coloration, habitat, and probably also in behavior
and ecology. They inhabit premontane and montane elevations along both the Caribbean and the Pacific
versants of the Costa Rican and/or Panamanian highlands. Within my thesis I performed a thorough
phylogeographic analysis of the complex. I separated the the male specimens into Operational
Taxonomic Units, according to their dewlap coloration, and in the case of identical dewlap coloration
among geographically widely separated samples also according to geography. Females were assigned
depending on their head scalation, and collection locality relative to nearest assigned male. I gathered
and compared 14 morphometric, and 26 pholidotic characters of 192 specimens (109 ♂, 83 ♀) and
examined the 16S gene of 53 specimens. Integrating these different lines of evidence, my results allow
the most comprehensive view on the taxonomy and phylogeography of the A. pachypus complex so far. I
confirm the validity of the four nominal species A. pachypus Cope 1876, A. tropidolepis Boulenger 1885,
A. magnaphallus Poe & Ibañez 2007, A. pseudopachypus Köhler, Ponce, Sunyer & Batista 2007.
Additionally, the study has lead to the description of A. benedikti Lotzkat, Bienentreu, Hertz & Köhler
2011. I created an updated distribution map, which shows an complex phylogeographic scenario. The
distributional ranges of the species are not arranged in a simple east-west sequence along the
continental divide, but show an irregular pattern and partially contact zones of up to three species of the
complex. In conclusion, within the A. pachypus complex, the male dewlap is the only morphological
character that allows, in combination with geographic data, the reliable assignment of a given male
individual to one of the nominal species. Other morphological characters, for example head scalation,
appear less diagnostic, allowing at most the differentiation between certain pairs of species.



Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Bizzarro, Joseph (Friday Harbor Laboratories,
Friday Harbor, United States); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Labs, Moss Landing, United States)

North Pacific spiny dogfish (Squalus suckleyi) trophic ecology: using integrated gut content and
stable isotope analysis to infer short and long term feeding trends

North Pacific spiny dogfish (Squalus suckleyi) are commercially and ecologically important predators that
are abundantly distributed in North Pacific waters, and therefore may play an important role in regional
marine ecosystems. Most historic research on this species has been focused on dogfish collected within
the inland waters of Washington and British Columbia, but little is known about offshore populations. We



                                                                                                         62
used traditional gut content analysis (GCA) and stable isotope analysis (SIA) to elucidate the trophic
ecology of dogfish from central California, U.S.A. GCA allows for quantification of prey items contained
within the stomach of a single individual and reveals what actual species are consumed on a short-term
basis. SIA uses elements as tracers (specifically carbon and nitrogen) to identify predator-prey
relationships as well as trophic position, allowing for long-term diet information. SIA analysis can be used
to complement gut content data via integrating both short and long term food habits, enhancing
information known about the trophic role of a given species. Based on GCA, the most abundant and
important prey taxa by number, weight, and the prey-specific index of relative importance were
euphausiids, fishes, and cephalopods. Similarly, the most frequently occurring prey taxa were fishes,
euphausiids, and cephalopods. In addition to diet composition, sources of dietary variability with respect
to size, sex, depth, location, season, and year are being investigated for GCA and SIA and will be
presented.



Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Labs, Moss
Landing, CA, United States); Dewar, Heidi (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La
Jolla, CA, United States); Bizzarro, Joseph (Friday Harbor Labs, Friday Harbor, CA, United States);
Kohin, Suzanne (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, CA, United States);
Vetter, Russ (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, United States)

Spot a basking shark: how California’s citizen scientists can aid in the recovery of an enigmatic
shark

The basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) is the second largest shark species, reaching a total length of
up to 10 m. It has been reported globally from high latitude seas, including Arctic waters, to the tropics.
The eastern North Pacific basking shark population was recently designated a ―Species of Concern‖ by
the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) for three main reasons: (1) notable, although largely
anecdotal, population declines; (2) a lack of recovery even after long-term cessation of fishery