y congregate. This suggests that individual lizards may specialize on particular prey species, and
actively forage for that species. We also tested for differences in food habits of males and females, independent of
body size.surgeonfishes from Ishigaki Island. Japan: Acanthurus bariene, A. lineatus, Naso lituratus. Triglycerides dominated
all samples of neutral lipid and constituted > 99% of IPF and FB. C16 fatty acids prevailed in both neutral and polar
lipids, although C18 and C20 acids were also common. Saturated fatty acids, dominated by palmitic acid (16:0),
comprised 38.7-50.7% of acids from neutral lipids and 30.8-41.1% from polar lipids. Polyunsaturated acids (PUFA)
were prevalent in polar lipids (especially 20:4n6. 20:5n3, 22:2n3, 22:5n3, 22:5n6 and 22:6n3). Common PUFA of
neutral lipids were 18:2n6,18:4n3, several n-3 and n-6 C20 acids, and 22:2n3 and 22:5n3. IPF and FB were almost
identical across spedes. The FB appears to be an accessory storage site which overcomes constraints on lipid
storage imposed by a small, inflexible abdominal cavity which contains both viscera and consistently voluminous gut
contents. Fatty acid signatures indicate that largely overlooked epiphytic or epilithic diatoms contribute significanfly
to lipid acquisition.




Aromatase activity in the neural tissues of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophla slrtalh
parivtalls) under hibernaculum temperatures. R.W Krohmer. Department of Science, Saint Xavier University,
3700 W. 103rd Street. Chicago, IL 60655 USA.

Numerous studies have indicated that the initiation of spring courtship behavior and mating in the male Canadian red­
sided garter snake, unlike most vertebrate species, is independent of circulating androgens. Recently, however, field
data has shown that circulating levels of testosterone (T), elevated in the fall, remain elevated throughout hibernation
and upon emergence. Even though T levels are elevated in the spring, to date, the only known stimulus initiating
courtship behavior is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by the onset of warm temperatures. In the field,
winters (and subsequently hibernation) can begin as early as October and extend into May. In the laboratory,
courtship behavior can be initiated after as few as seven weeks under hibernaculum conditions (total darkness at 4-
5C). However, as the duration of the dormancy period was increased (up to 17 weeks) courtship behavior
intensified. Similar to other vertebrates, the neural pathways critical, for the initiation and maintenance of courtship
behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons.
However, while these neurons respond to seasonal variations in T, the role of testosterone In the initiation and
maintenance of courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake has continued to elude Investigators. Recent
studies have identified aromatase activity (AA) within specific ares of the pathway closely associated with the steroid
concentrating neurons. The presence of AA within the areas controlling courtship, sug^sts T may play an indirect
role In "setting up" this neural pathway during the protracted hibernation in the field. This study was designed to
Investigate AA in neural tissues maintained under conditions of hibernation




   488                          16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
Applied Herpetology: a new Journal proposed. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences Department, Natural
Resources Institute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4 4TB, England.

Applied amphibian and reptile research covers natural products development [toxinology (snake and lizard venoms),
pharmacology (amphibian skin secretions), reptile leather and tortoiseshell industries); environmental monitoring
[amphibian teratology from incidence of abnormalities, and herpetofaunal ecotoxicology and contamination
bioindicatoia); farming [captive breeding and husbandry techniques for restocking populations, exhibition, teaching
and experimentation], and conservation and wildlife management [species consenration, biodiversity assessment
and sustainable utilization]. Papers in applied herpetology are often published in non-herpetological journals, or in
the world's heqietological journals, which are in effect subsidising governmental, international agency and
commercial sponsors of such work. There is a case for publication of peer-reviewed papers in applied research to
be funded by these sponsors, especially since relatively little research in herpetology is now financed that is not
applied. Such sponsors should include an allocation in projects proposed for the funding of publications.




   489                  ..     16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
Herpetofauna of the Albany Pine Bush. K.C. Hunsinger, The University at Albany, Albany, New York.

The Albany Pine Bush is a unique ecosystem characterized by sandy soils, vernal pools and pitch pine / scrub oak
forests located in the towns of Colonie, Guilderland and the city of Albany, New York. Using historic and current data,
Stewart and Rossi (1981) reported the presence of 30 species of herpetofauna in the Albany Pine Bush. Since that
time, there has been a significant commercial and residential development in and around the Pine Bush. This study
represents a re-survey of the area to determine what species of amphibians and reptiles are present today, estimate
their relative abundance and draw on Stewart and Rossi's work to estimate the impact that 20 years of development
has had upon the ecosystem and its inhabitants.

testosterone (T) levels. While these neural areas have been shown to be critical for the initiation and control of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, the role of T, if any, continues to elude investigators.
Recently, wo have identified aromatase activity (AA) in various regions of the garter snake brain by quantifying the in
vitro fonnation of (®H]estrone from androst-4-ene-3, 17-dione,[1,2,6.7-^H(N)]- precursor. To defemiine if AA was
intensified in areas containing sex steroid concentrating neurons, areas associated with courtship behavior were
isolated using a spedfic-area micro dissection punch technique. Specific areas investigated included the anterior-
hypothalamus preoptic area (AHPOA), nucleus sphericus (NS), and the septum (S). Punches were taken from the
cortex (C) as a possible control. There was no significant difference in AA in animals collected in the spring or fall.
There was a significant overall gender difference in AA, with females exhibiting higher levels of AA in the AHPOA
and NS. In males, the AHPOA and septum exhibited significanly greater AA than the nucleus sphericus and cortex,
while 9ie AHPOA exhibited significantly elevated AA when compared to the other neural areas.




Food tiabfts of the european wall lizard, Podardt slcuta. Introduced to L.ong Island, New York. N. Patel and
R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

We studied the stomach contents of 150 European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from several populations in
western Long Island, New York, throughout their active season in 1997. Their diets were made up of a wide variety
of ants, insect larva, beetles, spiders, and millipedes. The list of prey included many introduced species. We
compared our results to those reported for this species and conspecifics in their native habitat

Wo found a correlation between prey size and head width, which suggests that head width or a morphological factor
associated with head width, may constrain the size of prey that Individual lizards can consume. We further noted
that some individuals had eaten several prey items of the same species, which is surprising in cases of prey species
that do not normally congregate. This suggests that individual lizards may specialize on particular prey species, and
actively forage for that species. We also tested for differences In food habits of males and females, independent of
body size.




   491                           16:00 Tuesday                                  P4.                               PCH
A comparison of the movements of indigenous and displaced long-term captive ornate box turtles
(Terrapene omata) in the Sand Hills of Nebraska. D.L. Claussen. T. Luncan and K. Zemko, Dept, of Zoology,
Miami Univ., Oxford, OH, USA 45056.

Herpetologists often release animals after laboratory study in a laudable attempt at conservation. However, the
subsequent fates of such animals are generally unknown. We hypothesized that the behavior of these animals
would be markedly altered, possibly compromising their survival. We compared movements of turtles, captured in
the field and fitted with thread-trailers, with a matched group released simultaneously after one year of captivity. We
trailed each animal for 200 m (two or three days) and we subsequently mapped these trails, computing for each the
minimum convex polygon area, the maximum recorded speed, and three measures of trail sinuosity (the square root
of area divided by trail length (L), the greatest distance between two points divided by L, and the fractal dimension
(D)). The variance of the captive turtle data was significantly greater than that for the native turtles for trail area and
for two of the three sinuosity measures. However, contrary to expectations, none of the mean values differed
significantly between these groups, nor were there any obvious trends. Although we have no survivorship data, long­
term captivity and release in an unfamiliar location does not appear to markedly affect the short-term movement
patterns of ornate box turtles.




   492     ..        .   ..    16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
A mark-recapture analysis of the eastern garter snake population at the Mosquito Hill Nature Center, New
London, Wl. ATsoukatos and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700 W. 103rd Street,
Chicago, IL 60655.

Since the spring of 1996, we have been gathering specific life history parameters on the eastern garter snake
(Thamnophis sirtalis sirtaiis) population at the Mosquito Hill Nature Center, located along the Wolf River just outside
of New London, Wl. Animals were collected at the denning site in the spring and fall. The sex, weight and snout-vent
length were recorded and each animal was given a unique clipping pattern on their ventral scutes for ftjture
Identification. All animals recaptured were again weighed, measured and reclipped with their original clipping.
Between spring ‘96 and fall '97, 391 males and 131 females were collected, marked and data recorded. As of &1
■97, 23% of the males and 11% of the females marked had been recaptured al least once with 9% of the males and
0% of the females recaptured In two or more of the collecting periods. Recapture data demonstrates a remarkable
growth rate during the active season (spring to fall). As a population, males (n=22) gained 49.4+7.1 mm in length
and 18.3±1.3 grams in weight. While the single female, measured under the same conditions. Increased its' length
by 73 mm and gained 51.1 grams. During hibernation, animals exhibited a reduced growth rate with males (n=21)
gaining 1.4+0.5 mm in length and losing an average of 5.0+1.0 grams, while females (n=2) increased an average of
4.0+3.0 mm and lost 7.0+1.0 grams.   493                         16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                PCH
Scales of diversity: the role of parks in conserving genetic population structure of threatened snakes. KA,.
Prior. Endangered Species Division, Canadian Wildlife Service, Hull, Quebec KOH 1A3; H.L. Gibbs, Department of
Biology, McMaster, University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1; P.J. Weathertiead, Department of Biology, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Ontario K1S5B6.
We used DNA sampled from black rat snakes {Elaphe o. obsoleta} and eastern massasauga rattlesnakes (Sistnjrus
c. catenalus) in Ontario to investigate genetic population structure at several spatial scales. Our findings based on
RAPD markers indicate that geographically-isolated populations of rat snakes may not be genetically distinct, and
that sub-structuring within regional populations might be attributable to reduced snake movement and gene flow due
to ecological barriers. As such, park agencies should develop cooperafivo management strategies for regional
populations that span multiple jurisdictions. Data from rrucrosatellite markers indicate that isolated massasauga
populations are highly divergent and that regional populations may be comprised of inbred local populations. Thus,
fine-sc^e genetic structuring may be the norm for massasauga populations, rather than a corisequence of recent (<
300 years) anthropogenic effects. These data support the view that individual populations of massasaugas
associated with parks have high consenration genetic value since many populations probably contain a unique
portion of sub-specifio variation. This research has helped direct conservation efforts by providing parks with a
means of assessing the relative distinctiveness of remnant populations, sm empirical basis for identifying appropriate
scales of management, and a method for testing the efficacy of conservation actions.




   494                          .16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               P.CH
Preliminary life history analysis of the European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, introduced to Long Island,
New York. M. Sabatino. B. Spar and R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofsfra University, Hempstead, NY, USA,
11549.
We collected European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, from separate but similar populations in western Long Island,
New York, throughout the spring and summer of 1997, and assessed their reproductive condition. Diagnosable adult
females ranged in size from 44 to 77 mm SVL; the smallest female with eggs was 57 mm SVL. Of the 57 adult
females caught, 13 had eggs, clutch size ranged from 1 to 9 eggs, mean clutch size was 5.5 eggs, and median
clutch size was 6 eggs. Females were first found with eggs on 30 April; females were last found with eggs on 11
July.
The presence of fully shelled eggs in four females that also had a similar number of post-ovulatory but unshelled
eggs suggests that some females of this species may double clutch, at least in some years. This ability to produce
large numbers of eggs may help explain the fact that this species is rapidly expanding from its introduction site in just
30 years.




   495                        .16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                PCH
Reproductive biology of the male eastern garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis sirtalis) at the Mosquito Hill
Nature Center. D. Clesson and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University. 3700 W. 103rd Street,
Chicago, IL 60655 USA.
Spring male courtship behavior was assessed In the field following emergence from hibernation. Thrity adult male
eastern garter snakes were collected in either the fall (n=19) or spring (n=11), anesthetized and killed within 24
hours of capture. The testes and kidneys from each animal were excised for histological examination. In addition,
six animals were maintained under conditions of hibernation (total darkness, 4-7C) for 15 weeks, Followitig the end
of all courtship behavior, animals were processed as described above. Tubule diameters and epithelial heights were
measured from 10 seminiferous tubules and 10 sexual segment tubules. The mean fall seminiferous tubule diameter
was 176.4+7.2um and the epithelial height was 32.1+2.3pm. Histological examination revealed regressing epithelia,
consisting of 3-4 cell layers with sperm and spermatogonia the dominant cell type. The mean sexual segment
diameter was 127.0+3.1 pm with an epithelial height of 46.0+2.1pm and containing numerous, large sexual granules.
The mean spring seminiferous tubule diameter was 163.8+3.6pm and the mean epithelial height was 29.6±5.6pm.
Histological examination revealed regressed epithelia, consisting of 1-3 cell layers with spemafogonia the dominant
cell type. The mean sexual segment diameter was 115.5+4.2pm withan epithelial height of 41.5±2.5pm and
contained fewer granules that observed in the fall. Animals placed into artificial hibernation had a mean seminiferous
tubule diameter of 158.8±g.6pm and an epithelial height of 22.6±2.8pm consisting of 1-2 cell layers with
spermatogonia the dominant coll typo. The mean sexual segment diameter was 111.8±3.2pm and the epithelial
height was                The epithelia contained diffuse sexual granules.




     •'55                    .. 16:Q0 Tuesday                                  P4                                 PCH
Cross-species amplification of microsatellites developed for timber rattlesnakes (Crotalus horrldus). L.M.
Bushar. Biology Department, Beaver College, Glenside, PA USA; M. Mallga and H.K. Reinert, Biology Department,
The College of New Jersey, Ewing, NJ, USA.

Microsafellite analysis is a useful tool in studies of population genetics and kinship; however, few microsafellite loci
have been isolated for use with snake species. Cross-species amplification of microsafellite loci has been
demonstrated for a wide range of species, including plants, fish, birds, and mammals. We were Interested in
assessing the utility of microsatellites isolated from a timber rattlesnake (Crotalus hom'dus) genomic library in other-
species of rattlesnakes.

PCR primers designed for 5 different C. honidus microsatellite loci were used to screen individuals representing 8
Crotalus species (C. adamanteus, C. airox, C. cerastes, C. durissus, C. molossus, C. viridis, and C. willardi), 2
Sistrurus species (S. catenatus and S. miliarus) and Agkistrodon contortrix. Three of the primer sets (7-144, 7-87,
and 5A) were consen/ed in all of the species studied; although there was a high frequency of “drop outs' for some of
the individuals in some species. One of the primers (3-155) was only consenred in members of the durissus
subgroup (C. molossus and C. durissus), thus supporting this evolutionary grouping.

                                                                                                                             3




  496                          16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
 Origins of the American snake fauna. H.G. Dowling and J.V. Jenner, Rendalia Biologists, Talladega, AL 35160;
T. Pinou, Dept. Biol. Yale Univ., New Haven.,.

  Recent geological, paleontological, morphological, and molecular studies provide identification and better
definitions of the diverse clades that comprise the present American snake fauna. No single field provides a clear
zoogeographic narrative of these faunal elements but the consilience of information from multiple sources offers
such a base. Not unexpectedly, the oldest surviving clades are also the most ancient ones in the Americas. The
typhlopids and leptotyphlopids of the Neotropics and Africa probably date from the mid-Cretaceous splitting of
Gondwana by the Atlantic Ocean. The anomalepedids and Anilius in contrast are ancient South American
endemics without known relatives, although the latter may be a Recent relative of the Cretaceous +Dinilysia. The
Neotropical (true) boids appear to represent an ancient henophidian fauna that ranged from Madagascar across
Antarctica to South Arnerica. Conversely, the American erycids, tropidophiids (and              ?ungaliophiids and
?Loxocemus) derive from the Cretaceous-to-Eocene connection of eastern North America with Europe. This also
may be true of the caenophidian “North American Relicts.' The main American caenophidian fauna (crotalids,
elapids, xenodontids, dipsadids, colubrids s.s., and nafridds) did not arrive until later. Both paleontological and
molecular data support two or more Miocene entries of these snakes from the Old World via Bering Strait




   497                         16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                 PCH
African Raninae: A molecular phylogenetic perspective. M.G.duPreez. Department of Biochemistry, University
of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville, 7535, Africa; A. Channing, Department of Zoology, University of the
Western Cape, Private Bag X17, Bellville, 7535, Africa.

Nucleotide sequence comparisons were used to investigate the generic relationships within the subfamily Raninae in
Africa. Approximately 300 base pairs of the mitochondrial 12S ribosomal RNA gene from one representative of each
genus were sequenced. The phylogenetic tree was rooted with Bufo valliceps.

Support for the tree was estimated in various ways. Bootstrap values were calculated for the sequence tree. Decay
index values which measure tree stability in terms of supported resolution and the number of unambiguous base
changes along each branch are reported.

The tree for African ranines based on osteology (Clarke. 1981) was tested. Much of it is well supported.




   498        ....             16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
Morphological, osteological, serological and karyological Investigations of Turkish Hyla arborea
(Anura:Hylidae) populations. U. Kaya. Dept, of Psychology. Brown University, Box. 1853 Providence, Rl 02912
USA :Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ege University,, Bomova-lzmir Turkey.

The present studies deal with Hyla specimens (N:471) . which were examined by various methods
(morpnometrically, osteologically, serologically and karyologically). Different populations from Turkey are compared
to bring an under^anding of their taxonomic states. Our morphological findings show that the anterodorsally oriented
spur of the lateral stripe in the inguinal regions exists with a continuous lateral stripe in Hyla arborea. If there is no
spur then the stripe will often be discontinuous as seen in Hyla savignyi. Osteological research found the imbrication
and amkylosis of vomers over the sphenethmoid for Hyla arborea. For Hyla savignyi, imbrication and amkylosis do
not occur. A study of chromosomal sets of two species established the presence of largely identical karyotypes. Our
serological results indicated the presence of an extra albumin fraction (a total of 3) in the Black Sea Region
specimens of Hyla arborea than those of other regions. Our findings support the assertion that two different species
inhabit Turkey named Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi, which were taken as different subspecies by various authors.
The present study established the southern distribution limits of Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi in the east and the
west




   502                          16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                     .          PCH
Origin and evolution of the parthenogenetic lizards Cnemidophorus cozumela and C. maslini (Sauria:
Teiidae). N.L. Manriquez. O. Hernandez, M. Villagran and F.R. Mendez, Instituto de Biologia, Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico,, A.P. 70-153, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F. Mexico.

Recently Cnemidophorus maslini was considered as a different species of C. cozumela due to morphological
differences. C. maslini was suggested as an hybrid of C. angusbceps and C. deppii, nevetheless the origin of C.
cozumela is unclear. To propose the Origen and evolution of the unisexual lizards we detennine the histocompatibility
(through skin grafts) between C. cozumela and C. maslini, their karyotype, and the karyotype of the parental species
(C. angusticeps and C. deppii). The histocompatibility analysis shows a genetic homogeneity between the two
parthenogenetic species (100% graft acceptance), C. maslini has a diploid number of 47 chromosomes, as ttie
perfect hybrid of C. angusticeps (2n = 44) and C. deppii (2n = 50). C. cozumela has 50 chromosomes, apparently as
a result of three centromeric breaks in the C. maslini karyotype. This study suggest that C. cozumela and C. maslini
are the same species as the morphological and karyotypical differences recorded does not appear to be due to
genetic differences.                                                    "■" BBBwiiwsa wwsisa a WVVMV w>«w • (WkWi «* ««■ na w^w •«*«•«•• ■ IWI^I ns V*«f«
measured from 10 seminiferous tubules and 10 sexual segment tubules. The mean fall seminiferous tubule diameter
was 176.4+7.2um and the epithelial height was 32.1+2.3pm. Histological examination revealed regressing epithelia,
consisting of 3-4 cell layers with sperm and spermatogonia the dominant cell type. The mean sexual segment
diameter was 127.0+3.1pm with an epithelial height of 46.0±2.1|im and containing numerous, large sexual granules.
The mean spring seminiferous tubule diameter was 163.8+3.6pm and the mean epithelial height was 29.6±5.6um.
Histological examination revealed regressed epithelia, consisting of 1-3 cell layers with spermatogonia the dominant
cell type. The mean sexual segment diameter was 115.5±4.2um withan epithelial height of 41.5+2.5um and
contained fewer granules that observed in the fall. Animals placed into artificial hibernation had a mean seminiferous
tubule diameter of 158.8+9.6pm and an epithelial height of 22.6+2.8pm consisting of 1-2 cell layers with
spermatogonia the dominant cell type. The mean sexual segment diameter was 111.8+3.2pm and the epithelial
height was 4O2’+2.4pm. The epith^ia contained diffuse sexual granules.




Croea-spMies amplification of mlcrosatellftes developed for timber rattlesnakes iCrotatua horrleTuay. L.M.
Bushar. Biology Department, Beaver College, Glenside, PA USA; M. Maliga and H.K. Reinert, Biology Department,
The College or New Jersey, Ewing, NJ, USA.

Microsatellite analysis is a useful tool in studies of population genetics and kinship; however, few microsatellite loci
have been isolated for use with snake species. Cross-species amplification of microsatellite loci has been
demonstrated for a wide range of species, including plants, fish, birds, and mammals. We were interested in
assessing the utility of microsatellites isolated from a timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus) genomic library in other
species of rattlesnakes.

PCR primers designed for 5 different C. horridus microsatellite loci were used to screen individuals representing 8
CrotaJus species (C. adamanteus, C. airox, C. cerastes, C. durissus, C. molossus, C. viiidis, and C. willardi), 2
Sistrvrus species (S. catenatus and S. milianis} and Agkistrodon conlortnx. Three of the primer sets p-144, 7-87,
and 5A) were conserved in ail of the species studied; although there was a high frequency of 'drop outs' for some of
the individuals in some species. Ono of the primers (3-155) was only conserved in members of the durissus
subgroup (C. molossus and C. durissus), thus supporting this evolutionary grouping.




   500                             16:00 Tuesday                                       P4                        .         PCH
Cladlstic analysis of the angle-headed dragons (Gonocephalus sensu lato, Agamidae), a polyphyletic genus.
S.M. Moody. Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens OH 45701; G.J. Watkins-Colwell,
Department of Biological Sciences, Sacred Heart University, 5151 Park Avenue, Fairfield, CT 06432, USA.

The angle-headed dragons, Gonocephalus sensu lato have often been given as an example of a vertebrate that
straddles Wallace's Line. However, examination of the members of this genus of agamid lizard, distributed
throughout Southeast Asia, Oceania and Indo-Australia, has resulted in the discovery of numerous characters
strongly supporting the taxonomy of the pre-Boulenger 1800's in which several genera were recognized, and none
straddled Wallace's Line. Gonocephalus and Acanthosaura are found only in SE Asia and Indonesia whereas
species of New Guinea, eastern Australia and Oceania belong to the resunected genera Hypsilurus and Arua. The
cladistic relationships of the latter genera are with Physignathus, Hydrosaurus and the Australian radiation of
agamids. Gonocephalus and Acanthosaura dadistically belong with the Calotes and Agama radiation in Asia and
Africa. The Eocene agamid Tinosaurus from North America has been compared with these two dades and falls
with the former.




  .501                             16:00 Tuesday                                      ;P4                                   PCH
Relationships of Gastrophryne (Anura: Microhylidae) based on 12S mt rDNA sequences.                                      J. Feden.
Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA 23173 USA.

The genus Gastrophryne comprises 5 species: G. usta, G. carolinensis, G. olivacea, G. elegans, and G. picHventris.
The combined distribution of these species ranges from Honduras and El Salvador to Iowa, USA. Gastrophrjme
carolinensis and G. olivacea represent the northernmost range of the genus and are widely distributed in the USA.
Relationships among these spedes have been previously studied by Nelson (1972) who suggested a sister taxa
relationship between the two most northern species. Herein, we present a preliminary analysis of relationships based
on 12S mitochondrial ribosomal DNA sequences. Both strands of a segment of the 12S ml RNA gene were
sequenced. We obtained information on 429 bass pair positions for each taxon, among which 89 positions (about
21%) were variable. Discophus was used as the outgroup and characters were run unordered. Two equally
parsimonious trees (36 steps long, C.l. = 0.667) were obtained that alternatively placed G. elegans as sister taxa of
G. carolinensis and G. olivacea. Weighting transversions over transitions (10/1 ], we obtained a single tree (30 steps
long, C.l = 0.7) that supports a sister taxa relationship between G. elegans and G. olivacea. This preliminary
analysis does not support the doser relationship between the two North American species.

0^1       uro oiiiuc mii wiioii uc uiavvRluiluwuo cu> occii Hl nyiet oetviyfiyi, voit^iuyiuoi loj^arcii rouna me irTiDncauon
and amkylosis of vomers over the sphenethmoid for Hyla arborea. For Hyla savignyi, imbrication and amkylosis do
not occur. study of chromosomal sets of two species established the presence of largely identical karyotypes. Our
serological results indicated the presence of an extra albumin fraction (a total of -3) in the Black Sea Region
specimens of Hyla arborea than those of other regions. Our findings support the assertion that two different species
inhabit Turkey named Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi, which were taken as different subspecies by various authors.
The present study established the southern distribution limits of Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi in the east and the
west




Origin and evolution of the parthenogenetic lizards Cnemtdaphorua cozumeta and C. masrlnt (Saurla:
Telldae). N.L. Manriquez. O. Hernandez, M. Villagran and F.R. Mendez, Instituto de Biologia, Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico,, A.P. 70-153, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F. Mexico.

Recently Cnemidophorus maslini was considered as a different species of C. cozumela due to morphological
differences. C. maslini was suggested as an hybrid of C. angusticeps and C. deppii, nevetheless the origin of C.
cozumela is unclear. To propose the origen and evolution of the unisexual lizards we determine the histocompatibility
(through skin grafts) between C. cozumela and C. maslini, their karyotype, and the karyotype of the parental species
(C. angusticeps and C. deppii). The histocompatibility analysis shows a genetic homogeneity between the two
parthenogenetic species (100% graft acceptance). C. maslini has a diploid number of 47 chromosomes, as the
perfect hybrid of C. angusticeps (2n = 44) and C. deppii (2n = 50). C. cozumela has 50 chromosomes, apparently as
a result of three centromeric breaks in the C. maslini karyotype. This study suggest that C. cozumela and C. maslini
are the same spedes as the morphological and karyotypical differences recorded does not appear to be due to
genetic differences.




   503                           16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
Investigating monophyly in the sub-family Petropedetinae Noble 1931 (Anura: Ranidae). E. Scott. A. Dawood
and A. Channing, Zoology Department, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville, 7535, South
Africa.

In an attempt to establish the outgroup of the genus Cacostemum Boulenger 1887, a preliminary' molecular
investigation into the relationships among the genera of the sub-family Petropedetinae was conducted. Additional
exemplar sequences from the sub-family Raninae Gray 1825 were induded in the analysis, which used
mitochondrial 12s sequence data. Parsimony analysis of the results shows the genera of the Petropedetinae to be
interspersed with genera of the Raninae, refuting monophyly of both sub-families as currently recognized. Although
this result is by no means surprising, and has been found by other workers (e.g. Ford 1989,1993), it does highlight
problems associated with ranid ph^ogenetics in general. There is a need to find monophyletic dades within the
small African ranids in order to understand their phylogeny, so that evolutionary and biogeographic hypotheses
concerning them can be tested.




   504                           16:00 Tuesday                              . . P4                                 PCH
Freeze tolerance and cryoprotectant mobilization in the gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor).                       J.R. Layne.
Department of Biology, Slippery Rock, PA 16057 USA.

 This study characterized freeze tolerance and cryoprotectant levels in H. versicolor tram Illinois. Frogs were frozen
in the laboratory at -1.5, -3.5, and -5.5 C. All frogs tolerated freezing at -1.5 and -3.5 C but the survival rate declined
at -5.5 C (<50%). Calorimetry revealed that 46.2% of the body water froze at -1.5 C. Plasma glucose and glycerol
were substantially elevated, 14X and 5X respectively, in recently thawed frogs vs. unfrozen frogs. Three unfrozen
frogs had levels of plasma glycerol tanging between 17.1-36.8 mmol/L, suggesting an anticipatory response to
freezing, but another three unfrozen frogs had glycerol at 1.1 mmol/L. No correlation existed between levels of
plasma glucose and glycerol in unfrozen frogs and recently thawed frogs. Inverse relationships existed between
glycerol content and ice content and between plasma osmolality and ice content. The levels of freeze tolerance and
related protective measures appear sufficient for H. versicolor to successfully overwinter beneath forest floor debris
in Illinois.  505                         16:00 Tuesday
Revision of the genus Holocentms (Pisces: BeryciformesiHoiocentridae).                     p.R. McMillan, College of
Charleston, Grice Marine Laboratory, 205 Fort Johnson, Charleston, SC 29412 USA.

The two species of Holocentnts. H. adscensionis and H. rufus, are very siinilar iti appearance and overiap in many
characters that have been used to distinguish them, on occasion making iden ification difficult. Furthermore,
specimens of H. adscensionis from the central and eastern Atlantc, particularly St• Hel^a and Asoen^on islands
differ in a number of characters from putative conspecifios from the western Atlantic. The genus Hdoc^^sai^
the two species are redescribed, with new ranges tor frequently used characters provided as well as infomabon oil
other characters useful for distinguishing species. Principal components ^alyses of counts and sheared pnncipal
components of measurements are used to compare the species of Holocentrvs.              Differences among western,
central, and eastern Atlantic populations of H. adscensionis are addressed.




   506                         16:00 Tuesday                                .   P4
Field use of propofol: Finally a safe, effective, rapid recovery anesthetic f« reptiles. NX. Anderson, B- (^upe,
T. Hetherington and J. Williams, The Ohio State University, Department of Zoology, 1735 Neil Ave., Room 104
Botany and Zoology Building, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
In a field study on 11 Boiga irregularis, propofol provided 15-20 minutes of surgical anesthesia. Snakes recovered
rapIdlyX surgery, achTeving normal motor control and behavior after 2 to 3 1/2 hours, aI whichi time they
released at the point of capture. One snake experienced an atypical anesthesia and was mobile, M not aggress^
at release (153 minutes). Post-operatively, all snakes exhibited expected behavior and artivity for the duration of tlw
Study. Propofol has the advantage of minimal equipment requirements (synnges and needles), rapid onset of
anesthesia (< 60 seconds), short duration of action (15-20 minutes), effective muscle relaxation, and lack of
significant side effects. Propofol requires venous access. /Mthough propofol is usually easily administer^ to snakes
via the tail vein, the small size and fragility of these vessels in Borga irregulans required carJopuncture to admmister
the anesthetic. No pain reactions, heart arrhythmias, or deaths were asswiated with this technique. Propofol
induced a variable transient depression in respiratory and heart rates which did not appear to be clinically significant.




                                16:00 Tuesday                                   ■P4 .                            PCH
    507 .
 Supercooling and freeze tolerance In the lizard Podarcis s/cub.^^A.A. HuaSM and R.L.        Department of
 Biotogy, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549; K.B. Storey, Department of Biology and Chemistry,
 Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.
 We assessed European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from populations introduced to the U.S., for the abili^
 to tolerate freezing temperatures. This has implications for the future of this species currently undergoing rapid
 range expansion, and allows us to make informed guesses about its over-wintenng behavior.
 We first determined that they could regularly survive supercoolirig to down to -5’ C (temperature rronitored by
 thermocouple) for at least 60 minutes. Next, individuals were cooled to-2.S°C and freezing was induced. Lizards
 induced to freeze had body temperatures of -0.5 to +0.5° C; we ftawed thern after 15 minutes and hdd ^m at 5 C
 for 24 hours, when they were checked again for life signs. All three lizards frozen in this
 internal ice formation was inititated as would be expected in a natural environment, they rapidly froze and died.

 This species does not appear to be freeze tolerant, which differs froin results reported by Claussen et       ®
 conspecific (P. muralis}  VJe demonstrated that our different results are vey likely due to a different in
 experimental technique. Standardization of techniques and definitions are needed if freeze tolerance compansons
 are to be made between species and populations.




    511                          16.00 Tuesday                                  P4                               'PCH
 Evidence for a resident subpopulation of northern cod In Gilbert's Bay, Labrador. J.M. Green. Department of
 Biology, Memorial University, St. John's,, Newfoundland, Canada, , A1B 3X9; j.S. Wroblewski and W.L. Bailey,
 Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland.

 A historical spring fishery for northern cod (Gadus morhua) in Gilbert's Bay, Labrador prompted us to tag, with
 transmitters, nine Gilbert's Bay cod (48-70 cm) in October, 1996. Eight tagged fish were repeatedly relocated
 between January and July 1997. Several had returned to their site of capture in a shallow (< 30 m) arm of the bay
 where they remained for the duration of tracking. All were active throughout the winter months, at times swimming
 distances of several km per day. Samples from the subpopulation indicated that adult (38-73 cm) cod reached
 spawning condition in late May-eariy June, several months later then the ripening period reported for cod
 ovenrrintering offshore on Hamilton Bank, but a time similar to resident cod spawning in Trinity Bay, Newfoundland.
 Many Gilbert's Bay cod have a lower length-at-age and fecundity-af-age than cod from Hamilton Bank or Trinity Bay,
 likely reflecting a growth rate slowed by the cold sea water temperatures of coastal Labrador. Body condition factors
 suggest that food is not limiting growth.

  508                        ■ 16:00 Tuesday
Aerobic metabolism of Eleutherodactylus antillensis under stressful hydric conditions. K Nieves-PuiqdoHer,
University of Puerto Rico, Deparment of Biology, PO. Box 23360, San Juan, PR, 00931-3360.

Eleutherodactylus antillensis is a neotropical frog found in grasslands, shrubs and fems around Puerto Rico. We
measured the combine effects of changes in hydration and temperature on oxygen consumption dunng rest and
exercise at 20“C, 25®C and 30®C. Aerobic metabolism was not affected by temperature and hydraton lev^s.
Nevertheless, a tendency to increase in oxygen consumption was observed during rest and exercise at 30 C. The
resistance of this species to stressful conditions suggests that it might be able to survive a wide range of habitats.




   509                        .16:00 Tuesday                              .
A new protocol to test the effects of chronic pesticide exposure on eggs and larval amphibians. S.E, Julian
and J.H? Howard, Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg, MD 21532 USA.

The potential role of pesticides in amphibian declines has generated many studies of short-term, acute exposures.
Investiqations of chronic exposures may more accurately reflect conditions experienced by natural populations. We
present a biologically realistic protocol to study the effects of pulsed exposures of pe^iades on amphibian egg
masses and larvae. We will examine effects of three insecticides on survival, growth, behavior, and development ot
several amphibian species. Eggs and larval stages of three amphibian species will be exposed to three
concentrations of each pesticide based on previously detennined LC50 s. Egg masses will be placed in 5 gallori
aquaria containing pesticide and maintained until hatching success and deformities can be recorded. The larval
experiment consists of a static test with pesticide renewal every two weeks in conjuntriion with water replacement.
Larvae will be maintained in 20 gallon aquaria from two weeks post-hatching through metamorphosis. Sun/iv^,
arowth lime to metamorphosis, activity levels, and behavioral and developmental abnormalities will be monitored.
Uncontaminated sediment will be placed in the bottom of each aquarium to absorb pesticides and provide an
additional pathway for its uptake in tadpoles. Preliminary results suggest that species differ in pesticide sensitivity
and pesticides are rapidly absorbed by sediment.




                                16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
   ■510
Mitochondrial gene expression In response to freezing, dehydration and aiioxia strewes in the frrez^
tolerant wood frog (Rana ayhratica}. S.Wu and K.B. Storey, Department of Biology, Carteton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.
 Wood frogs display natural freeze tolerance during winter hibernation. To extend our knowledge of the rnetabolic
 adaptations that     support freezing survival, we are exploring freeze-induced gene    expression. Via differentia
 screening of cDNA libraries prepared from         liver or brain of frozen wood frogs, we have identified several
 mitochondrial genes that are upregulated during freezing exposure. Included are^e mitochondrial gene for f^DH-
 ubiquinone oxWoreductase in liver and the mitochondrial genes for 12S and 1^ rRNA subunits, transfer RN/\s
 (fRNAVal tRNALeu, tRNAPhe) and ATPase (subunit 6 and 8) in brain.               The accumulatiori of mitixhondna
 ribosomal gene transcripts (12S and 16S         rRNA) may compensate for low temperature inhibition of nbosomal
 assembly whereas elevated tRNA transcripts may help sustain mitochondrial protein biosynthesis during freezing.
 Upregulation of NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase and ATPase may be a resporise to freeze-iriduced anowa to
 hdp optimize use of declining oxygen supplies as freezing progresses.          Northern hybndizafion analysis also
 assessed the expression of these genes in other organs during freezing and tested their responses to one of two
 individual stresses that are components of freezing: dehydration and anoxia.




    514      .                 16:DQ Tuesday                                  P4                               PCH
 Ichthyological collection of medium tocantins (Brazil). P.H.F. Lucinda, C.S. Agostinho and E.E. Marques,
 Insfituto de Biologia e Saude Publioa, Universidade do Tocantins, CP25 Porto Nadonal TO Brasil 77500-000.

 The ichthyofauna in the medium and upper Rio Tocantins (Brazil) has been poorly investigated. Among the fish
 collecting expeditions that have taken place in that area, the Indiana University Expedition, headed by Carl Temetz
 in 1923, whose material is presently housed in the California Academy of Sciences, represents one of the scarce
 sources of study about this iohth^fauna. Papers concerning the ichthyological composition of the Araguaia -
 Tocantins System are also rare. The level of taxonomic knowlerige related to fish from its medium portion is still very
 precarious. The majority of studies comprise technical reports, which analyse the ichthyological composition
 superficially, however, they do not present discussions on taxonomic or systematic problems. Several species show
 serious taxonomic difficulties, or have no description. Moreover, this fauna is threatened because of the constraction
 of several hyitroelectric power plants. According to our standpoint, one of the most important measures to mitigate
 this situation is to carry out species inventory in poorly sampled and unsampled areas. The objective of this study
 was to inventory part or this ichthyofauna, what resulted in the creation of an Ichthyological Collection of the Medium
 Rio Tocantins. 'The collection is housed at the Institute de Biologia e Saude Publica da Universidade do Tocantins, in
 Porto Nadonal town, Trxiantins State of Brazil. It has been gathered since 1995 and results from several projects
 carried out in that institution, as well as some others still in execution. Nowadays, the collection shelters about 215
 species, representing the majority of Neotropical fish groups. Nonetheless, the precise identification of several
 species Is still wanting.   507                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Supercooling and freeze tolerance In the lizard Podarcis sicub. A.A. Hussain and R.L. Burke, Department of
Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549; K.B. Storey, Department of Biology and Chemistry,
Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.

We assessed European wall lizards, Podards sicula, collected from populations introduced to the U.S., for the ability
to tolerate freezing temperatures. This has implications for the future of this species currently undergoing rapid
range expansion, and allows us to make informed guesses about its over-wintering behavior.

We first determined that they could regularly survive supercooling to down to -5° C (temperature monitored by
thermocouple) for at least 60 minutes. Next, individuals were cooled to -2.5°C and freezing was induced. Lizards
induced to freeze had body temperatures of -0.5 to +0.5° C; we thawed them after 15 minutes and held them at 5°C
for 24 hours, when they were checked again for life signs. All three lizards frozen in this fashion died. Thus, when
internal ice formation was inititated as would be expected in a natural environment, they rapidly froze and died.

This species does not appear to be freeze tolerant, which differs from results repotted by Claussen et al. for a
conspecific (P. muralis). We demonstrated that our different results are very likely due to a difference in
experimental technique. Standardization of techniques and definitions are needed if freeze tolerance comparisons
are io be made between species and populations.




   511        .              ..16:00.Tuesday                            P4    . .   .                PCH
Evidence for a resident subpopulation of northern cod In Gilbert's Bay, Labrador. J.M. Green. Department of
Biology, Memorial University, St. John's,, Newfoundland, Canada, , A1B 3X9; J.S. Wroblewski and W.L. Bailey,
Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland.

A historical spring fishery for northern cod (Gadus morhua) in Gilbert's Bay, Labrador prompted us to tag, with
transmitters, nine Gilbert's Bay cod (48-70 cm) in October, 1996. Eight tagged fish were repeatedly relocated
between January and July 1997. Several had returned to their sits of capture in a shallow (< 30 m) atm of ths bay
whsrs they remained for ths duration of tracking. All were active throughout the winter months, at times swimming
distances of several km per day. Samples from the subpopulation indicated that adult (38-73 cm) cod reached
spawning condition in late May-early June, several months later then the ripening period reported for cod
ovenrrintering offshore on Hamilton Bank, but a time similar to resident cod spawning in Trinity Bay, Newfoundland.
Many Gilbert's Bay cod have a lower length-at-age and fecundity-at-age than cod from Hamilton Bank or Trinity Bay,
likely reflecting a growth rate slowed by the cold sea water temperatures of coastal Labrador. Body condition fectors
suggest that food is not limiting growth.




   512                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Taxonomic status and geographic distribution of Bryconamerlcus elgenmanni Evermann and Kendall, 1906
(Characiformes, Charaadae). A.M. Miquelarena, Institute de Limnologia "Dr. Raul A. Ringuelet*, C.C. 712, (1900)
La, Plata, Argentina.; A.E. Aquino. American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street,, New
York, NY, 10024, USA.

Evermann and Kendall (1906) described Bryconamericus eigenmanni based on two specimens of Rio Primero
(Cordoba, Central Argentina), after which there were no more records of the species. The similarity between S.
eigenmanni and B. iheringi was noted by several authors, though finally keeping both as separate species. The need
of comparison of good population samples from ths areas of distribution of bo^ nominal species was suggested by
Malabarba and Kindell (1995), however misplacing ths type locality of B. eigenmanni within the Rio Parana system,
when actually the former belongs to an endorheic basin. The objective of our study is to provide evidence supporting
the validity or B. eigenmanni on base of material from ths type-locality drainage. A redescription using morphometric,
meristic and osteological characters, an analysis of the geographical distribution as well as a comparison with B.
iheringi, are provided. It is concluded that B. eigenmanni can be distinguished from other species of the genus by a
combination of characters including number of maxilla teeth, premaxilla shape, body depth, eye horizontal diameter,
and secondary sexual dimorphism of male pelvic fins. The distribution range suggests that the species is endemic to
endorheic drainages of Central Argentina.




   513                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Development of an index of biotic integrity for the mid-atlantic highlands region. F.H. McConnick. US
Environmental Protection Agency, 26 W. Martin Luther King Dr., Cincinnati, OH 45268 USA; R.M. Hughes,
Dynamac International, c/o US Environmental Protection Agency, 200 SW 35fh St., Corvallis, OR 97333, USA; P.R.
Kaufmann and A.T. Herlihy, Oregon State University, c/o US Environmental Protection Agency, 200 SW 35fh St,
Con/allis, OR 97333 USA; D.V. Peck, US Environmental Protection Agency, National Health and Environmental
Effects Laboratory, 200 SW 35th St, Corvallis, OR 97333 USA.

From 1993-1995, fish assemblage data were collected from 298 streams in the Mid-Atlantic Highlands region as part
of the USEPA's Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP). We examined responses of fish
community metrics to physical, chemical, habitat and landscape indicators of catchment disturbance. Univariate and
multivariate analyses of relationships among fish community metrics, habitat integrity and anthropogenic disturbance
were used to develop an index of biotic integrity (IBI) for the assessment of stream condition in the region. Metrics
are scored continuously from 0-10 and the resulting 16 metric IBI ranges from 0-100. We assessed the condition of
the fish community based on hypothesized reference criteria reflecting historical conditions. We established scoring
criteria of 85% for excellent biological integrity, 70% for acceptable, and 50% for impaired. Only 19.6% of the stream
length had excellent or acceptable fish communities. Forty-two percent of the total stream length was marginal and
37% was impaired.

    510                         16:00 Tuesday ..____________________ P4 ______                 ___________ pCH
Mitochondrial gene expression In response to freezing, dehydration and anoxia stresses in the freeze-
tolerant wood frog (Rana sylvatica). S. Wu and K.B. Storey, Department of Biology, Carteton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.

Wood frogs display natural freeze tolerance during winter hibernation. To extend our knowledge of the metabolic
adaptations that     support freezing survival, we are exploring freeze-induced gene    expression. Via differential
screening of cDNA libraries prepared from         liver or brain of frozen wood frogs, we have identified several
mitochondrial genes that are upregulated during freezing exposure. Included ate the mitochondrial gene for NADH-
ubiquinone oxidoreductase in liver and the mitochondrial genes for 12S and 16S rRNA subunits, transfer RNAs
(tRNAVal, tRNALeu, tRNAPhe) and ATPase (subunit 6 and 8) in brain.              The accumulation of mitochondria
ribosomal gene transcripts (12S and 16S         rRNA) may compensate for low temperature inhibition of ribosomal
assembly whereas elevated tRNA transcripts may help sustain mitochondrial protein biosynthesis during freezing.
Upregulation of NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase and ATPase may be a response to freeze-induced anoxia to
help optimize use of declining oxygen supplies as freezing progresses.         Northern hybridization analysis also
assessed the expression of these genes in other organs during freezing and tested their responses to one of two
individual stresses that ate components of freezing: dehydration and anoxia.




   514                         16:00 Tuesday                               P4                          .. PCH
Ichthyological collection of medium tocantins (Brazil). P.H.F. Lucinda, C.S. Aaostinho and E.E. Marques,
Institute de Biologia e Sauds Publics , Universidade do Tocantins, CP25 Porto Nacional TO Brasil 77500-000.

The ichthyofauna in the medium and upper Rio Tocantins (Brazil) has been poorly investigated. Among the fish
collecting expeditions that have taken place in that area, the Indiana University Expedition, headed by Cart Temetz
in 1923, whose material is presently housed in the California Academy of Sciences, represents one of the scarce
sources of study about this ichthyofauna. Papers concerning the ichthyological composition of the Araguaia -
Tocantins System are also rare. Ths level of taxonomic knowledge related to fish from its medium portion is still very
precarious. The majority of studies comprise technical reports, which analyse the ichthyological composition
superficially, however, they do not present discussions on taxonomic or systematic problems. Several species show
serious taxonomic difficulties, or have no description. Moreover, this fauna is threatened because of the constnjction
of several hydroelectric power plants. According to our standpoint, one of the most important measures to mitigate
this situation is to carry out species inventory in poorly sampled and unsampled areas. Ths objective of this study
was to inventoiy part of this ichthyofauna, what resulted in the creation of an Ichthyological Collection of the Medium
Rio Tocantins. The collection is housed at the Institute de Biologia e Saiide Publica da Universidade do Tocantins, in
Porto Nacional town, Tocantins State of Brazil. It has been gathered since 1995 and results from several projects
carried out in that institution, as well as some others still in execution. Nowadays, lhe collection shelters about 215
species, representing the majority of Neotropical fish groups. Nonetheless, the precise identification of several
species is still wanting.




   515                          16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Shore fishes of the Trindade Island, Espirito Santo, ES BrazihPreliminary checklist. J.L. Gasparini,
UFESASEUNES - Sao Mateus, ES 29930-000; S.R. Fleeter, UFES/CEG - Depto. de Ecologia, Vitoria, ES 29060-
900.

The Trindade Island is located at 20°30'S and 29’20'W, approximately 620 nautical miles (1260 km) off the coast of
Espirito Santo, forming with Martin Vaz Archipelago the most isolated insular group off the Brazilian coast. Due to its
geographical isolation, Trindade's fauna arouses great biogeographic interest. Two expeditions were undertaken
(1995 and 1997), summing up 71 days of field work, and about 215 hours of undenwater observation (snorkeling)
surveying the ichthyofauna from tidal pools to reefs of 20m deep. To collect specimens a combination of various
fishing techniques, such as hand netting, spearfishing and hook and line, were used. Voucher specimens are
deposited in the fish collections of the following institutions: Depto. de Zoologia, Unicamp (ZUEC), Museu de
Zoologia, USP (MZUSP) and Colegao Zoologica, UFES. A total of 71 fish species belonging to 35 families were
recorded. The most representative families were: Carangidae (8 species), Balistidae (6), Serranidae (5), Labridae
(4), Pomacentridae (4) and Muraenidae (4); Haiichoeres and Sparisoma were the most speciose genera, each with
three species. Two unidentified species were found: Stegastes sp. (Pomacentridae) and Haiichoeres sp. (Labridae),
which probably are endemic to the Trindade/Maitin Vaz insular group.




   516                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Spacial and temporal patterns of diversity, fishery productivity and distribution of fish communities in the
upper Jurud Extractive reserve (Brazilian Amazon). R.A.M. Silvano. Nucleo de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil; B.D. Amaral, Centro de Recursos Hidricos e Ecologia
Aplicada Escola de, Engenharia, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil; O.T. Oyakawa, Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de Sao
Paulo, Box 7172,, 01064-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

We sampled the ichthyofauna of the Upper Jurua Extractive Reserve (Brazilian Amazon) through gillnet fishing, in
the main upper Jurud river, its tributaries and the floodplain lakes in the wet and dry seasons. The dry season yielded
a greater number, biomass, species richness and diversity of fishes than the wet period, what can be due the
cortcentration of fishes due to low water level. The diversity and species richness do not varied between habitats, but
the lakes yielded a greater biomass of fish than the main river and tributaries. This could be associated to a greater
stability of the lakes, less subjected to subtle variations in water level. The fish assemblages varied mainly between
the two seasons and between lakes and the lothic environments. This spatial variation was more pronounced during
the dry season (when lakes and rivers showed a more distinct ichthyofauna). In the wet season there was a certain
mixing in fish composition among the habitats, probably due to dispersal movements effectuated by the fishes in the
innundated forest. We observed a high total fish diversity in the Upper JuruS River, what can be related partially to a
high beta diversity, or variation in species composition between habitats.   517                         16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                PCH
Shore fishes of the Trindade Island, Espirito Santo, ES BrazIkPreliminary checklist J.L. Gasparinb
UFES/CEUNES - Sao Mateus, ES 29930-000; S.R. Fleeter, UFES/CEG - Depto. de Ecologia, Vitona, ES 29060-
900.
The Trindade Island is located al 20°30'S and 29°20'W, approximately 620 nautical miles (1260 km) off the coast of
EspMto Santo, forming with Martin Vaz Archipelago the most isolated insular group off the Brazilian coast. Due to its
oeoaraphical isolation, Trindade's fauna arouses great biogeographic interest. Two expeditions were undertaken
(1995 and 1997), summing up 71 days of field work, and about 215 hours of underwater observation (snorkeling)
surveying the ichthyofauna from tidal pools to reefs of 20m deep. To collect specimens a combination of vanous
fishing techniques, such as hand netting, spearfishing and hook and line, were used. Voucher spearnens are
deposited In the fish collections of the following institutions: Depto. de Zoologia, Unicamp (ZUtC), Museu de
Zo&oqia, USP (MZUSP) and Cole^ao Zoologica. UFES. A total of 71 fish species belonging to 35 farnilies were
recorded. The most representative families were: Carangidae (8 species), Balistidae (6), Serranidae (5), Labndae
(4). Pomacentridae (4) and Muraenidae (4); Halichoeres and Sparisoma were the most speciose genera, ea^ with
three species. Two unidentified species were found: Stegastes sp. (Pomacentridae)                                   j
which probably are endemic to the Trindade/Martin Vaz Insular group. Financial support: MARINHA DO BRASIL and
AVIDEPA.




   518                         16:00 Tuesday                .                 P4
Migration and population structure of the porbeagle Shark, Lamna nasus, in Canadian Atbntio watery WJi-
Jovce. Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4H6: P.C.F. Hurley. Fishenes Biologist, Manne R^sh Division
(Maritimes Region), Bedford Institute of Oceanography, P.O. Box 1006, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia B2Y 4A2.

Seasonal movements of the porbeagle shark, Lamna nasus. in Canadian Atlantic waters were deteimined using size
and sex composition of catches sampled by Fisheries Observers in the porbeagle longline fishery. Males and
immature females predominate porbeagle catches on the Scotian Shelf edge in March and April. The data suggest
ttiat mature females segregate from the main body of the population during this penod. The The proportion of mature
females in catches increases in May and June. Porbeagle move onto the Shelf in May and northeastward along the
Shelf in May and June, moving into the Gulf of St. Lawrence and onto the Grand Banks m late June and early July.
Larger porbeagle move off the Shelf into the Gulf of St. Lawrence and onto the Grand Banks first, followed by
vounger porbeagle. Large porbeagle begin to leave the Gulf in September and large females prodominatG catches
on trie Grand Banks in September to November. Porbeagle move out of the Gulf and off the Grand Banks in
November and out to the Shelf edge in December. Migration of the porbeagle shark in Canadian Atlantic waters is
complex and catch rate analyses should incorporate size and sex composition of catches on a seasonal basis.




   ■519                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                 PCH
Preliminary results of stock discrimination of Dolly Varden char, Salvelinus malma, and Arctic char, S.
alpinus, from Iwavik National Park, Yukon Territory, using mIcro-PIXE analysis of otolith sfrOTtiurn.
Babaluk and J.D. Reist, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 501 University Crescent, Winning, MB, R3T 2N6, V.A.
Sahanatien, Dept, of Canadian Heritage, Parks Canada, P.O. Box 1840, Ini^k, NT, XOE OTO; N.M. Halden, Dept, of
Geological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2N2; J.L. Campbell, Dept, of Physios, University of
 Guelph, Guelph, ON, NIG 2W1.
 Micro-PIXE (proton induced X-ray emission) analysis was used to determine the content of strontium in the core area
 of otoliths from Dolly Varden and Arctic char from the north slope of the Yukon Territory. Otoliths are composed
 primarily of calcium carbonate (as aragonite). Trace elements such as strontiurn which are'.present in the water the
 fish inhabits and which are chemically similar to calcium are often incorporated into the otoliths. Because otoliths do
 not undergo resorption of constituents, they contain a permanent record of the environments occupied by the fish
 throughout life. The otolith core is formed at the site where the individual was spawned; thus, environmental yanation
 in the levels of strontium and other trace elements has the potential to differentiate biological groups of fish. M^^h
 strontium levels in otolith cores from populations of Iwavik char ranged from 280 to 520 ppm and were assoaated
 with the habitat occupied. Strontium differences in otoliths have the potential to discnminate biqlogica st^ks of
 chars in Iwavik National Park and may also be useful in identifying fish from mixed groups to their stock of ongin.
 This work confirms biological stock stmeturing observed in these char through other methods.




       523                      14:00 Tuesday                                  SE                               THN .
 Phenology of growth and mortality among smallmouth bass broods. T. Friesen**’. ‘Department of Zoology,
 University of Guelph, Guelph ON; M. Ridgeway, ‘Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources.

 We detennined the variability in year class and brood-specific growth and mortality rates of first-year smallmouth
 bass (Microptenis dolomieu) and assessed the importance of temperature and spawning date to growth and
 sunrival. Date of spawning, hatch, first-feeding and metamorphosis were recorded and growth and survival were
 estimated for broods from a single population over 5 spawning seasons. Growth and developmental rates were
 positively associated with water temperature within and among years, but much of the variability in growth rate
 remained unexplained by temperature. Nest sunrival was high during the embryonic period in all years, despite low
 water temperatures, but decreased sharply during the larval and early juvenile periods. Brood-specific mortality rates
 were highly variable and mortality rate distributions were consistently skewed to the right in all years. Brood-specific
 mortality rates were weakly to moderately related to spawning date and temperature within years. Brood-specific
 rnortality rates differed significantly among years, but were not related to temperature. Cumulative morality also
 differed among year classes, but was negatively related to temperature. Our results suggest that temperature may
 influence Srst-year recruitment in smallmouth bass through its combined effects on development, growth and
 mortality, while spawning date ultimately determines the length of the first growing season.




    524 .                       14:30 Tuesday                                  SE                                TTHN

  520                        , 16:00 Tuesday                          ..       P4          ..                     PCH
Resurrecting fist) and Invertebrate footage from archived videotapes. T.A. Potts, National Undersea Research
Center at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, 7205 Wrightsville Ave., Wilmington, NC 28403 USA.

Since 1984, the National Undersea Research Center at the University of North Carolina at VVilmington has supported
over 50 research projects Involving the use of shallow and deep submersibles. On every mission numerous hours of
videotape were recorded and stored In the Center’s archive - often lying dormant after the principal investigators
proprietary use period had elapsed. In early 1998, we initiated a project to revl^ each tape and capture
representative cups of all fishes, invertebrates and habitat types encountered. Through collaboration with
taxonomists, we hope identify all species and make a CD that can be used by the science community.




   521                           13:00 Tuesday                                SE                                  THN
Phenology of reproductive investment with seasonal fluctuation in resource availability: Does facultative
matrotrophy maximize fitness? J.C. Trexler. Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University,
Miami, FL 33199 USA; D.L. DeAngelis, Biological Resources Division, U. S. Geological Survey, USA.

Seasonality in resource availability and physiological maintenance costs may change the relationships of tradeoffs
that balance to maximize fitness. We explore the ways in which recently acquired (income) and stored (capital)
energy may be used in reproductive strategies in a seasonally fluctuating environment. We have developed an
indi\ndual-based model to contrast the fitness of females (measured as lifetime production of offspnng) using income
and capital modes of reproduction in a seasonal environment. Our model is motivated by the reproductive biology
of sailfin mollies, a livebearing fish with facultativa investment in egg size. Depending on their body size and lipid
stores, females produce large eggs that develop without additional nutritional supplementation (lecithotrophy), or
smaller eggs yielding embryos whose nutrition is supplemented during development (lecithotrophy and
matrotrophy). Lipid stores vary seasonally from an average of 15% of dry weight in females reproducing in the early
spring, to a low of 5% of dry weight in summer-reproducing females. We explore the hypothesis that facultative
matrotrophy permits a mixed capital and income-fueled reproductive strategy, and yields maximizatiori of fitness in
the face of a tradeoff of egg size and offspring number when compared to pure capital or income strategies.




   522                           13:30 Tuesday        .                         SE                                 THN
On the virtue of being the first born: the influence of date of birth on fitness In mosquitofish, Gambu^a
affinis. D. Reznick. University of California, Riverside, CA 92521; E. Schultz, University of Connecticut, Stoirs CT
06269-3042; S. Morey, US Fish and Wildlife Service, 2800 Cottage Way, Sacramento, CA 95825; H. Rodd,
University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 1 Al
Gambusia affinis and G. holbrooki from localities like Illinois. North Carolina, and New Jersey stop reproducing in late
July to mid-August, when there may be up to two months of mild weather remaining in the season. This is more than
enough time to produce an additional litter of young. At the same time, females store up to 20% of they dry mass in
fat These fat reserves are partially utilized during the winter, but some remain the following spring and are used for
reproduction. Why would a short-lived species forego producing a litter of young in the late summer in favor of storing
fat for reproduction the following spring? We hypothesized that the fitness of young produced in the spnng is higher
than the hypothetical young that could have been produced the previous fall and that this difference is sufficient to
compensate for the risk that the female will not survive to produce a litter the following spnng. We tested this
hypothesis with enclosure experiments in which we evaluated three components of fitness of newborn young as a
function of their date of birth. At four times during the summer, we set out 20 offspring from ten different litters in ten
different enclosures, then estimated the probability of survival to maturity, age at maturity and fecundity in the first
litter The last outplant date was after the usual end of the reproductive season and represents the hypothetical last
litter of the season. We obtained these litters by keeping females in the laboratory with long photopenods and high
water temperatures. Our results, duplicated in two seasons, demonstrate that the earliest bom young have a much
hiaher Drobability of survival to maturity and much more rapid development than those toitj late the season.
These      factora wtH enhance fitness sufficiently under most conditions to favor the early cessation of reproduction.




    526                      .    16:00 Tuesday                                 SE                                THN
 Seasonality, tlmo constraints, and life history transition: an experimental approach. L. Rowe. Dept Zoology
 University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario.

Seasonality leads to time constraints on the major life history transitions. I review recent theory that develops
predictions on the patterns of age and size at maturity expected in seasonal environments. Unfortunately common
patterns in life history transitions may result from a variety of constraints imposed by or even unrelated to
seasonality. Therefore, studies that center primarily upon obsenration and pattern offer little to disentangling the
various forces that can lead to common patterns. Experimental methods are required for this task. I review a series
of experiipents on a variety of taxa that have informed these issues. I focus on two predictions. Arst, individuals
approaching a time horizon are expected to take greater foraging risks and thereby decrease their time to maturity
Second, independent of any behavioural responses, organisms approaching a time horizon are expected to
accelerate development and similarly decrease time to maturity. The experimental results lend support to these
hypotheses.




   527                           16:30 Tuesday                                 SE                                 THN     519                         16:00 Tuesday                                                                      PCH
 Preliminary results of stock discrimination of Dolly Varden char, SahfeBnus malma, and Arctic char S
         anTi      h"®'             Territory, using mlcro-PKE analysis of otolith strOTitium iL
                                    Oceans Canada, 501 University Crescent, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2N6: V f<
                 9?'?®“'®" ^'®^i®g®’ parks Canada, P.O. Box 1840, Inuvik, NT, XOE OTO? N.M. Maiden, D^pt. of
Guelphl GL^ph?ON; N?G 2WT               Winnipeg, MB, ROT 2N2: J.L. Campbell, Dept, of Physics, University of


of                               x-ray emisaon) analysis was used to determine the content of strontium in the core area
             of                                 ^®f'f'"" ‘h® "olh s'oP®        ‘he Yukon Territory. Otoliths are composed
             “I®'®®? .®®'^O®^ (as aragonite). Trace elements such as strontium which are present in the wafer the
nnt                             ®*’®S'®®"y s'^'lar to calcium are often incorporated into the otoliths. Because otoliths do
                              ®°®®?'*“®®’®'J^ey Contain a permanent record of the environments occupied by the fish
in                                  IS         ^*1*^® ^1*® u^®^ **^® individual was spawned; thus, environmental variation
Llr^Mi      ®          ViIS ®'’'^ °^®'^ '®®® ®l®®’s®*s has the potential to differentiate biological groups of fish Mean
wHh                             o?® I?'" P0P‘'l®i'0®s of Ivvayik char ranged from 280 to 520 ppm and were associated
                        ®,‘^,t, Sjfoof'oh' differences in otoliths have the potential to discriminate biological stocks of
       '® iwawk Nahorial Park and may also be useful in identifying fish from mixed groups to their stock of origin
This work confirms biological stock structunng observed in these char through other methods.                           “




     523                        14:00 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
Phenology of growth and mortality among smallmouth bass broods. T. Friesen*-*’. ‘Department of Zoology,
University of Guelph, Guelph ON; M. Ridgeway, *0013110 Ministry of Natural Resources.

We determined the variability in year class and brood-specific growth and mortality rates of first-year smallmouth
bass (ABcropterus dolomieti) and assessed the importance of temperature and spawning date to growth and
surviv^. Date of spawning, hatch, first-feeding and metamorphosis were recorded and growth and survival were
estimated for broods from a single population over 5 spawning seasons. Growth and developmental rates were
posifively associated with water temperature within and among years, but much of the variability in growth rats
remained unexplained by temperature. Nest survival was high during the embryonic period in all years, despite low
water temperatures, but decreased sharply during the larval and early juvenile periods. Brood-specific mortality rates
were highly variable and mortality rate distributions were consistently skewed to ths right in all years. Brood-specific
mortality rates were weakly to moderately related to spawning date and temperature within years. Brood-specific
mortality rates differed significantly among years, but were not related to temperature. Cumulative morality also
differed aimong year classes, but was negatively related to temperature. Our results suggest that temperature may
influence iirst-year recruitment in smallmouth bass through its combined effects on development, growth and
mortality, while spawning date ultimately determines the length of the first growing season.




     524                        14:30 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
Is spawning phenology sufficient to explain adult recruitment in smallmouth bass populations? M.S.
Ridgeway and B.J. Shuter, 1 Harkness Laboratory of Fisheries Research, Aquatic Ecosystems Science Section,
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Third Floor North, 300 Water St., Peterborough, Ontario K9J 8M5; M.J.
Gross, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, University of Minnesota, USA.

The timing and duration of spawning in smallmouth bass populations are closely tied to body size and spring
warming rates. A repeatable pattern of large males preceding small males In the timing of reproduction has been
obsenred at a number of sites. The alternating life history hypothesis proposes that the potential gains made by
young-of-year as a consequence of this seasonal pattern of spawning are sufficient to predict size of maturity and
spawning time of individu^s. We present three lines of evidence that together indicate the acquisition of home
ranges in the late juvenile stage is a key process in adult recruitment in our study population in Lake Opeongo. DNA
fingerprinting demonstrates a restricted spatial distribution of juveniles in their first summer and little or no size
advantage associated with the timing of parental spawning. Home range analysis of adults demonstrates significant
fidelity to home ranges, areas of concentrated use and a daily movement pattern suggesting spatial memory.
Finally, a 60 year record of age-specific abundance and growth demonstrates that density-dependent growth occurs
at ages 2-3; a period of time after their initial restricted distribution in their first summer and prior to the adult home
range phase. We believe this transition phase is the key to understanding adult recruitment and that spawning
phenology may interact with this element of bass ecology rather than a direct connection to adult maturity as a
proposed in the alternating life history hypothesis.




     525 .                      15:30 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
Adaptation-by-time within pacific salmon populations.               A.P. Hendry. School of Rsheries, University of
Washington, Box 357980 Seattle, WA, USA.

Correlations between breeding date and the life histo^ or energy stores of individuals might arise owing to two
different mechanisms; condition dependence or adaptation-by-time. Condition dependence is the conventional view,
and predicts that individual size, condition, or status influence breeding date. This concept has been profitably
applied to iteroparous. Income breeding species with flexible breeding times. It seems poorly-suited, however, to
some semelparous, capital breeding species that have less flexible breeding times. For these species, a more
plausible explanation is that heritable maturation schedules allow temporally-isolated population components to
adapt to selective regimes specific to their breeding times (adaptation-by-time). The fundamental difference between
the two hypotheses is that condition dependence considers breeding date within a season to be a proximate effect of
variation in life history traits or energy allocation, whereas adaptation-by-time considers breeding date to be an
ultimate cause of such variation. I present evidence for limited gene flow among temporal components of Pacific
salmon populations and evidence that they exhibit adaptive variation tailored to selective regimes that vary through
the breeding season. Adaptation-by-time appears relevant to temporal trends in body size, reproductive life span,
patterns of energy allocation, and the development rate of embryos.

    522                          13:30 Tuesday                                                                     THN




 GambusiaaKnis and G. holbrooki from localities like Illinois, North Carolina, and New Jersey stoo reoroducino in lata
                            there may be up to two months of mild weather remaining in the season. This is more than
                          ®® ®‘f^.'f'°®®l. i*f®5°f young. At the same time, females store up to 20% of their dry mass in
                                       iriilizBd during the winter, but some remain the following spring and are used for
              a          ? H ®*!P'*-lived species forego producing a fitter of young in the late summer in favor of storino
                     ^®              spnng? VJe hypothesized that the fitness of young produced in the spring is highe^r
than the hypothetical young that could have been produced the previous fall and that this difference is sufficient to
hSIIIShBQk                       *’? ’®T®’®         2°* ®‘J®''''® *° produce a litter the following spring. We tSd Ws
hypothesis with enclosure expenments in which we evaluated three components of fitness of newborn vouno as a
bnotion of their date of birth. At four times during the summer, we set out 20 offspring from ten different litters% ten
           enclosures, then estimated the probability of survival to maturity, age al maturity and fecundity in the fi^
 liter. The last outpl^t date was after the usual end of the reproductive season and represents the hyiwthetical last
wBtor Ib^® ®®,?®°"- 'J(® obtairied these litters by keeping females in the laboratory with long photopenods and high
w?h®Br nmh!wiih ®®r'                'JpRI'®®*®^     *"o seasohs, demonstrate that the earliest born young have a much
                                 rriatunty and .mu^ more rapid development than those bom late in the season.
These two factors will enhance fitness sufficiently under most conditions to favor the early cessation of reproduction




  526                   .   ■ 16:00 Tuesday                            SE                            THN
Seasonality, time constraints, and life history transition: an experimental approach. L. Rowe. Dept. Zoology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario.

Seasonality leads to time constraints on the major life history transitions. I review recent theory that develops
predictions on the patterns of age and size at maturity expected in seasonal environments. Unfortunately common
patterns in life history transitions may result from a variety of constraints imposed by or even unrelated to
seasonality. Therefore, studies that center primarily upon observation and pattern offer little to disentangling the
various forces that can lead to common patterns. Experimental methods are required for this task. I review a series
of experiments on a variety of taxa that have infomied these issues. I focus on two predictions. Rrst, individuals
approaching a time horizon are expected to take greater foraging risks and thereby decrease their time to maturity.
Second, independent of any behavioural responses, organisms approaching a time horizon are expected to
accelerate development and similarly decrease time to maturity. The experimental results lend support to these
hypotheses.




   527                         16:30 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
State-dependent timing of breeding In fishes: proximate explanations and ultimate implications. E.T. Schultz.
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs CT 06269-3042 USA.

The seasonal timing of reproduction may vary with individual characteristics (or 'state variables'), such as size and
energetic state. I review this phenomenon in fishes. I show that the pattern is widespread, in taxonomic terms and
across reproductive modes and behaviors. I show that there is evidence that individual state can affect the timing of
first reproduction in the season (onset) as well as the last breeding effort of the season (termination), in serially-
spawning fishes. The most common observation is that large individuals commence breeding activity earlier in the
season than small individuals. State dependence in phenology is considered at several levels of organization. The
physiological effect of state variables, in tenns of how they affect the endocrine system to influence timing, is poorly
understood. Clarification of the relationship between state variables and timing is needed, and perhaps best
addressed with eiqierimental manipulation of individuals. State-dependence in timing is meaningful from an ultimate
perspective. Optimization of breeding time is often viewed in terms of single fitness components, especially survival
of offspring. State-dependence suggests that the situation is more complex. I show that fish systems are promising
subjects for tests of various models of optimal breeding times.




   528                          13:00 Tuesday       ...                       CR5                                MCN
Support for a mesodermal origin of the nuchal glands of Rhabdophls Barlnus (Serpentes: Colubridae). A.H.
Savitzkv. Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529-0266, USA; W.A.
Velhagen Jr., Department of Biology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA 22807, USA; A. Mori,
Department of Zoology, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto, 606-01, Japan; KA. Roberts, Department of Biological
Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529-0266 USA; A. Das, Department of Biology, James Madison
University, Harrisonburg, VA 22807 USA.

The natricine colubrid snake Rhabdophis tigrinus possesses a parasagittal series of paired glands in the neck that
serve a defeiisive function. Early reports of the embryonic origin of ttie glands suggested that they arise from
mesodermal tissue, rather than from ectoderm as do most other cutaneous glands in vertebrates. We examined
both adult and embryonic glands using several gross anatomical, histological, and electron microscopic techniques,
and our results support a mesodermal origin of the nuchal glands. Our embryonic material confinns earlier reports
that the glands anse as mesenchytnal condensations deep to the developing epidermis, with no evidence of the
epithelial invagination that characterizes the development of most cutaneous glands. Adult specimens injected with
Microfil reveal that the major network of cutaneous vessels lies superficial to the glands, further supporting a
mesodermal origin. The adult glands possess a thick connective tissue capsule, and there is no evidence of
epithelial organization of the interior cells.   529                          13:15 Tuesday                                  CR5                ..       .       MCN
Two skinks of Florida's xerlc habitat: phylogeography of Neoseps reynoldsl and Eumeces egreglus. AJVL
Clark. BEECS Genetic Analysis Cote, University of Florida, PO Box 110700, Gainesville, Florida 32611-0700 USA;
B.W. Bowen, Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville,, Florida 32611 USA; L.C. Branch,
Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611 USA; P.E. Moler, Florida Game
and Fresh Water Rsh Commission, 4005 South Main Street, Gainesville, Florida 32601-9099 USA.

Both Neoseps reynoldsi and Eumeces egregius are lizards associated with xeric habitats of Florida. To assess
phyiogeographic patterns in these two species, mtDNA sequences were compared from various sites across the
state. Neoseps reynoldsi occurs only on three ridges in the central highland of the Florida peninsula. Populations are
highly structured, witti four major lineages observed and deep genetic division among the ridges. The central
haplotypes in a parsimony network are associated with the northern portion of the Lake Wales Ridge, one of the
oldest habitats in peninsular Florida, suggesting an ancient radiation from this central ridge. Eumeces egregius
comprises five subspecies that occur through most of Florida and into Georgia and Alabama. The major partitions in
an mtDNA phylogeny for E. egregius are not concordant with subspecies designations. However, the mtDNA are
consistent with the hypothesis that this species also radiated outward from an ancestral population on the Lake
Wales Ridge. These findings raise conservation concerns for the loss of genetic diversity in the rapidly disappearing
scrub habitats of Florida's ancient ridges.




   530                          13:30 Tuesday                                  CR5      ..         .               MCN
Is it all just walking pterygoids? An exploration of feeding mechanics in snakes. B.A. Young. Dept, of Biology,
Laibyette College, Easton, PA. 18042 USA.

Classic descriptive and functional studies of ophidian feeding have resulted in a detailed, and supported, hypothesis
for the mechanics of prey ingestion in snakes. This hypothesis, commonly known as the pterygoid walk, centers on
the sequential protraction and retraction of the contralateral palato-maxillary arches. Given the phylogenetic history
and cephalic staictural diversity of snakes, as well as their variation in prey preference, it would seem unlikely that all
snakes use the same prey ingestion mechanics. The diversity of feeding mechanics was explored through a
morphological examination of the mandibular syphysis, a region generally taken to have no special function in prey
ingestion. Serial sections through the syrnph^is of over 180 species revealed substantial variation in tissue
composition and structural arrangement. Suites of characters suggest this anatomical region may perform different
functional roles in different species. Observations of ophiophagous snakes reveal prey ingestion accomplished with a
highly modified pterygoid walk. In these cases only unilateral displacement of the palato-maxillary arch functions in
prey ingestion, with the caudal portion of the pterygoid displacing the prey posteriorly.




   531                          13:45 Tuesday                  ..   .          CR5                             .   MCN
The ontogeny of morphological variation: sex, family, and testosterone effects on head, body, and tail
growth in the garter snake, Thamnophls sirtalis. R.B. Kino. Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois
Univeristy, DeKalb, IL, USA 60115.

The evolution of population- and species-level differences requires heritable variation in phenotype. However,
phenotypic variation may have physiological and environmental as well as genetic causes. In an effort to elucidate
the proximate causes of morphological variation in the garter snake, Thamnophls sirtalis, offspring born to 26 wild-
caught females were reared in captivity. Within each litter, males and females were assigned at random to two
treatment groups and received sham or testosterone-containing subcutaneous implants for a three month period
starting at three months of age. Growth in head dimensions, body size, and tail length was monitored until snakes
were six to 14 months old and was analyzed using repeated-measures multivariate analysis of variance. Family
membership had pervasive effects on growth in all traits. These effects may be attributable to penetic variation or
maternal effects arising from the common in utero environment shared by litter-mates. Sex had significant effects on
growth in all traits but the magnitude of these effects was small, suggesting that differences in body size seen in
adult garter snakes do not arise until later in life. Elevated testosterone levels had significant but small negative
effects on growth in body size and head dimensions.




   535..                         14:45 Tuesday                                  CR5                    .           MCN
A new look at what the eye implies about the early ancestors of snakes. C.L. Caorette. Evolution, Ecology, and
Organismal Biolog, Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

Gordon Walls (1940, 1942) constructed an elegant logical story for the early origin of snakes as burrowers, based
upon the anatomy of the eye. Independently, Mahendra (1938) suggested that burrowing snakes, such as Typhlops,
represented the most basal snake lineages, also underscoring the hypothesis of a fossorial ancestry for snakes.
This hypothesis, with Some modification, has been widely accepted (Underwood, 1970; Rieppel, 1988). Recent
phylogenetic research by Caldwell and Lee (1997) suggested an alternative to the fossorial ancestor hypothesis,
reviving an early hypothesis for an aquatic origin of modem snakes. Can the ophthalmic characteristics so forcefully
argued by Walls for a fossorial origin of snakes equally support an argument for an aquatic origin for snakes? In fact,
many of ^ese same ophthalmic characteristics are observed in aquatic taxa. The shape and relative size of the lens
and the method of accommodation in modem snakes are typical of aquatic animals and suggest an aquatic ancestry
for snakes. Other characteristics of the eye are less obviously attributable to an aquatic ancestor but are still
consistent with this alternative hypothesis. In light of the revised nistorioal framework, this alternative hypothesis for
ths ecological origin for snakes merits closer inspection.




   536                           13:00 Tuesday            ..   .               CR1                                 CHM
Evaluation of a by-catch reduction device to reduce diamondback terrapin {Malaclemys terrapin) mortality In

   532                         14:00 Tuesday                               .   CR5                              MCN
Estimates of male and female reproductive success In the northern water snake, Nerodia sipedon sipedon,
using microsatellite DMA markers. M.R. Prosser and H.L. Gibbs, Department of Biology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, L8S 4K1; P.J. Weatherhead, Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S
5B6.

Estimates of individual reproductive success are essential for determining patterns of sexual selection in snakes, yet
studies which assess reproductive success using genetic markers are rare. We used microsatellile DNA markers to
conduct parentage studies in two wild populations of the northern water snake, Nerodia sipedon , in Eastern
Ontario. Specifically, eight microsatellite loci were isolated and used to assign paternity to 48 broods with a high
probability of exclusion [P(E)=0.999], and subsequently to estimate individual male and female reproductive
success. Our results indicate that 1) multiple paternity occurs in approximately 40% of the broods bom in the wild,
confirming findings from other studies that females accept copulations from multiple rtiales, and 2) less than 10% of
^e marked males sired any offspring over the three years of this study, suggesting that there may be strong
selection acting on certain male phenotypic characters that maximize male reproductive success.




   533                        14:15 Tuesday                                    CR5 . .                         MCN
Hierarchical patterns of genetic population structure in black rat snakes (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta) as
revealed by microsatellite DNA analyses. S.C. Lougheed, Dept. Biol., Queen's Univ., Kingston, ON K7L 3N6;
H.L. Gibbs. Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, L8S 4K1; K.A. Prior and P.J.
Weatherhead, Dept. Biol., Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6.

Northern temperate snakes have a number of life history characteristics that could lead to genetic stnjcturing at fine
geographic scales including: 1) use of communal hibernacula for over-wintering and 2) high adult inter-annual fidelity
to specific hibernaculum sites. In this study we investigated this possibility by examining the distribution of variation
at six microsatellite loci in one such temperate snake taxon, the black rat snake (Elaphe o. obsoleta). Sampling
occurred at three hierarchical scales ranging from individual hibernacula to regional populations, mostly within the
Frontenac Axis region of eastern Ontario. We detected no statistically significant pair-wise differentafion (FST and
RST} between hibernacula within the same sub-populations (inter-hibernaculum distance =BE 6 Km). However,
isolation by distance was evident among locales within the Frontenac Axis (maximum distance of 50 Km) and among
regional populations (maximum distance of 1500 Km). Conservative estimates of Ne derived from heterozygosity
values ranged from approximately 600 to 2000. These values are far in excess of the number of snakes typically
found in a single hibernaculum and suggest relatively large genetic neighborhoods encompassing many communal
hibernacula. Our results suggest viscosity of gene flow over relatively short distances (at the scale of tens of
kilometers) but substantial genetic exchange among local hibernacula.




   534                          14:30 Tuesday                                  CR5                               MCN
Studies of lung-based hearing in amphibians and reptiles. T.E. Hetherington. Department of Zoology, Ohio
State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210-1293 USA.

Lungs have been shown to function in reception of airborne sound in snakes and species of frogs that lack tympanic
middle ears, and this lung pathway may represent the most primitive mechanism of hearing in tetrapod vertebrates.
Laser vibromefric studies were extended to investigate the acoustic responsiveness of the lateral body walls and
lungs of salamanders and lizards, and additional studies analyzing potential routes of sound energy transfer from the
lungs to the inner ear were conducted on frogs. The body walls of several species of salamanders and lizards were
found to be responsive to sound, typically showing a low frequency peak in motion (< 300 Hz) and a higher
frequency peak from 800-2000 Hz depending on body size. In contrast, the body wall of lungless plefhodontid
salamanders showed a reduced low frequency peak in motion and completely lacked the higher frequency peak.
Neurophysiological studies on fire-bellied toads (Bomblna orientalis) suggest that sound energy is not transferred
from the lung to the inner ear via respiratory pathways. Vibrometric experiments suggest instead that the operoularis
system may be involved. Sound-induced motion of the suprascapula decreased dramatically when sound was
blocked from reaching the body wall/lung. Lung-induced motion of the suprascapula may be relayed via the
operoularis muscle to the operculum in the oval window of the inner ear.




   538                          13:30Tuesday. .                                CR1                  .           CHM
On conservation of the Sahelian giant tortoise, Geochelone sulcata. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences
Dmartment, Natural Resources Insbtute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4
4TB, England,

 Geochelone sulcata (Cryptodira: Tesfudinidae) achieves a length of 830 mm and weight of 105.5 kg, and is the
largest of the world's continental tortoises. It has a range forming a 600-700 km wide belt across Africa's Sahelian
region from Mauritania and Senegal in the west to Eritrea and Ethiopia in the east, and was reported still to be
common in the western Sahel during the late 19th century. The information database is poor, but populations today
are known to be very depleted in most of the range, due to utilization as food by local people and collection for the
international live animal trade. The giant tortoise inhabits light savannah woodland, grassy during June-October
rains, but sparsely vegetated and livestock-trampled during the Sahelian dry season. Refuge is sought in bunows.
The species occurs in zones with mean annual rainfall 140-1098 mm. The bioclimatio range is "desertic", "sub-
desertio" and barely "warm tropical - dry season of long duration", and vegetation mainly "Semi-desert grassland
and shrubland: northern Sahel and Somalia-Masai", "Sahel Acacia woodland, grassland and deciduous bushland"
and "undifferentiated woodland: Sudanian and Ethiopian". Using locality records, a project is being developed to
map the giant tortoise's optimum habitat by means of satellite imagery. This will form the basis for recommending
the creation of a natural reserve in Mali, and areas for re-stocking with captive-bred animals.




   539    ..                    13:45 Tuesday                                  CR1                              CHM
Ecology of the Jamaican slider turtlerJhAnnfSiiiJ »3ri2«                  sp^ies-Ievel differences requires heritable variation in phenotype. However
phenotypic vanation may have physiological and environmental as well as genetic causes in an effort to elucidate
                          "’“JPhologioal variation in the garter snake, T/iamnophfe XwafeTofeprinrbonJ to^ S^lX
                  were reared in captivity. Within each litter, males and females were assigned at random to two
Steltinaatmfee                     rSJLfc                           s^^=^aneous implants for a three month period
were^v                        gJ                   '*™®®S'O®S. body siz®, and tail length was monitored until snakes
                                  V'®® ®o®'yz®‘l “5'09 repeated-measures multivariate analysis of variance Famflv
                             effects on growth in all traits. These effects may be attributable to genetic variation or
                    hXh                      <^®«’environment shared by litter-mates. Sex had s^nificant effects rxi
                        the magnitude of these effects was small, suggesting that differences in body size seen in
adult garter snates do not anse until later in life. Elevated testosterone levels had significant but small neoative
effects on growth in body size and head dimensions.                                     5»'yn»ncani oui smaii negative




   535                        14:45 Tuesday                       .... CR5 .                           MCN
A new look at what the eye Impllee about the early ancestors of snakes. C.L. Capretle. Evolution, Ecology, and
Organismal Biolog, Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

Gordon Walls (1940, 1942) constnicted an elegant, logical story for the early origin of snakes as burrowers, based
upon the anatomy of the eye. Independently, Mahendra (1938) suggested that burrowing snakes, such as Typhlops,
represented the most basal snake lineages, also underscoring the hypothesis of a fossorial ancestry for snakes.
This hypothesis, with some modification, has been widely accepted (Underarood, 1970; Rieppel, 1988). Recent
phylogenetic research by Caldwell and Lee (1997) suggested an alternative to the fossorial ancestor hypothesis,
reviving an eariy hypothesis for an aquatic origin of modem snakes. Can the ophthalmic characteristics so forcefully
argued by Walls for a fossorial origin of snakes equally support an argument for an aquatic origin for snakes? In fact,
many of these same ophthalmic characteristics are observed in aquatic taxa. The shape and relative size of the lens
and the method of accommodation in modem snakes are typical of aquatic animals and suggest an aquatic ancestry
for snakes. Other characteristics of the eye are less obviously attributable to an aquatic ancestor but are still
consistent with this altemative hypothesis. In light of the revised historical framework, this alternative hypothesis for
the ecological origin for snakes merits closer inspection.




   536                          13:00 Tuesday                                .CR1                               CHM
Evaluation of a by-catch reduction device to reduce diamondback terrapin [HXalaclemys terrapin} mortally bi
crab pots. J.P. Green. Ohio University, Athens, OH, USA; W.M. Roosenburg, Dept, of Biological Sciences,, Ohio
University, Athens, OH 45701 USA.
Diamondback terrapins, Malaclemys terrapin, frequently drown due to incidental capture in crab pots. Crab pots
selectively capture male and young female terrapins, thereby skewing sex ratios and removing individuals with high
reproductive value. We tested a by-catch reduction device (BRD) to determine its ability to reduce tenapin
enbapment and the effect the BRD had on the size and number of crabs that were caught in crab pots. We tested
three size BRDs, 4 cm x 10 cm, 4.5 cm x 12 cm and 5 cm x 10 cm, on both standard crab pots and modified crab
pots designed to prevent terrapin mortality. We found that the 4 cm x 10 cm BRD effectively prevented turtle entry,
however, eliminated crabs based on height. Neither the 5 cm x 10 cm nor the 4.5 cm x 12 cm BRDs affected crab
size or the number of crabs caught, but the 4.5 cm x 12 cm BRD reduced terrapin by-catch by 82 percent, whereas
the 5 cm X 10 cm BRD only reduced terrapin by-catch by 50%. We stress the importance of using BRDs to reduce
terrapin captures throughout their range, thus preserving the biodiversity of wetland ecosystems and restoring or
maintaining natural sex ratios of terrapin populations.




   537                          13:15 Tuesday                                ..CRI                              CHM
Estimating gopher tortoise population sizes: Management implications of a study in Soutti Carolina. T-Pi
Tuberville and M.E. Dorcas, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, P. O. Drawer E, Aiken, SC
29802, USA.
The gopher tortoise {Gopherus polyphemus] is legally protected by state regulations throughout its r^ge and
federally listed as threatened in the western portion of its range. Popuialiori sizes of gopher tortoises have
traditionally been calculated using standard correction factors that estimate the number of tortoises based on foe
nunfoer of burrows in a given area. However, correction factors may vary among seasons, habitats, and regions and
there are no quantitative studies on gopher tortoises in foe northeastern portion their range. We used a volunteer­
based burrow c^nt survey to mark 1174 potential tortoise burrows on the Tillman Sand Ridge Heritage Preserve in
Jasper County, SC. To evaluate the effectiveness of the burrow count survey for estimating tortoise population size,
we Investigated 368 marked burrows using Infrared burrow cameras. We obserwd 49 tortoises using foe burrow
cameras and estimated the population size to be 153 adult tortoises. Our site-specific correction of 0.183 is
considerably loviror than previously published correction factors and resulted in a substantially lower population
estimate than those calculated from widely used correction factors. Our results emphasize foe critical need to
consider regional variation in foe relationship between burrow number and tortoise population size when developing
and using correction factors.

               r? niDernacuium ana suggest relatively large genetic neighborhoods encompassinq many communal
                                     viscosity of gene flow over relatively short distances %f the scale of Tens of
Kilometers) but substantial genetic exchange among local hibernacula.




mHHil                                               airborne sound in snakes and species of frogs that lack tvmoanio
                         pathway may represent the most primitive mechanism of hearing in tetrapod vertebrates
      ri?                     J extended to investigate the acoustic responsiveness of the lateral body walls and
                    encl lizards, and additional studies analyzing potential routes of sound enerov transter from the
teuSrt   he                           On fregs The body walls <?f 'Several species of sXlTdSs s^d feards werl
found to be responsive to sound, typically showing a low frequency peak in motion (< 300 Hz^ and a htnhor
sal^^dereSJwe^ rreri^?rB°ri         depending on body size. In contrast, the body wall of lungleL ptethodonM
                      a reduced low frequency peak in motion and completely lacked the higher freouencv oeak
                           on fire-bellied toads (Bombina orientalis} suggest that sound eneray is not transferred
curfom ms?® i?     inn®r ear via respiratoiy pathways. Vibromefric expenments suggest inslead^hat the opercularis
S^dTrom^eaoh?nTi®the bodv'^waMi^n                         suprascapula decreased dramatioally when soTind was
             reaching the body wall/lung. Lung-induced motion of the suprascapula mav be relaved via tha
opeiculans muscle to the operculum in the oval window of the inner ear.




  538                       13:30 Tuesday                                 CR1                            CHM
On conservation of the Sahelian giant tortoise, Geochelone sult^ala. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences
Department, Natural Resources Institute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4
4TB, England.

Geochelone sulcata (Cryptodira: Testudinidae) achieves a length of 830 mm and weight of 105.5 kg, and is the
largest of the world's continental tortoises. It has a range forming a 600-700 km wide belt across Africa's Sahelian
region from Mauritania and Senegal in the west to Eritrea and Ethiopia in the east, and was reported still to be
common in the western Sahel dunng the late 19th century. The infoimation database is poor, but populations today
are known to be very depleted in most of the range, due to utilization as food by local people and collection for the
international live animal trade. The giant tortoise inhabits light savannah woodland, grassy during June-October
rains, but sparsely vegetated and livestock-trampled during the Sahelian dry season. Refuge is sought in bumows.
The species occurs in zones with mean annual rainfall 140-1098 mm. the bioclimatio range is "desertic", "sub-
desertic" and barely "warm tropical - dry season of long duration", and vegetation mainly "Semi-desert grassland
and shrobland: northern Sahel and Somalia-Masai", "Sahel Acacia woodland, grassland and deciduous bushland"
and "undifferentiated woodland; Sudanian and Ethiopian". Using locality records, a project is being developed to
map the giant tortoise's optimum habitat by means of satellite imagery. This will form the basis for recommending
the creation of a natural resenre in Mali, and areas for re-stocking with captive-bred animals.




    539                         13:45 Tuesday                                  CR1                               CHM
Ecology of the Jamaican slider turtle (Trachemys terraperi}, with implications for conservation and
management. KJt. Buhlmann and T.D. Tuberville, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, SC,
29802, USA; R.H. Kerr and D. Booher, Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

We investigated populations of the Jamaican slider turtle (Trachemys terrapen}, a species endemic to Jamaica. We
sampled turtles at four sites-- three along the southern Jamaican coast and one in northwest Jamaica. We captured
turtles in a variety of habitats, including a permanently ponded wetland, farm ponds, and a stream in a karst
landscape. Turtles were also found in a series of seasonal ponds where they retreat into nearby cave refugia. The
refugia remain flooded, thus allowing the slider population to exist in this seasonally arid landscape. We did not
observe or capture turtles during limited sampling in a large river and a brackish mangrove swamp. Individuals from
the northwest population appeared morphologically distinct from turtles captured along the south coast and
descriptions of T. terrapen provided in the literature. The native people hanrest turtles whenever they are found
incidentally. Concentrated populations, such as those in the cave refugia, are heavily exploited. We found red­
eared sliders (Trachemys scripts elegans} in Jamaican pet stores and suspect they could become established in
Jamaica, possibly hybridizing with the native slider. Our preliminary research suggests that T. terrapen is a highly
threatened species needing conservation action in order to insure its persistence.




   540                          1.4:00 Tuesday.                               CRI                                CHM
A comparison of morphological and reproductive characteristics of nesting loggerhead sea turtle
populations. M. Tiwari and K.A. Bjomdal, Archie Carr Center for Sea Turtle Research, 223 Bartram Hall,, Dept, of
Zoology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611.

Few studies have addressed intraspecific trends within a marine turtle species over a large area. The main objective
of this study was to quantify whether loggerhead sea turtles nesting in Florida , Brazil, and Greece differ signifioaiitly
in their morphology and reproductive output. Data on body size, clutch size and egg size were collected from nesting
females. To place ideas in a more general perspective, morphological and repr^uctive data on other loggerhead
populations were compiled from the literature and examined for latitudinal trends within the Atlantic and
Mediterranean. Differences in moqjhology and reproductive output were observed among the three populations.
Indicating that each population experiences and responds to a unique combination of factors both at and away from
the nest™ beach. Both body size and egg size were significantly correlated with latitude. However, correlations
were not significant when Mediterranean data were excluded, suggesting that turtles in the Mediterranean encounter
environmental conditions significantly different from oceanic populations. This study highlights important differences
among populations, broadens the concept of lite history variation to a turtle species not confiried to a single
geographic location, and emphasizes the need for conserving genetic and phenotypic variation in marine turtle
populations.  .541                         14:15 Tuesday                      .. . .        CR1                            CHM
Effects of human disturbance on five-line'd skink (Eumeces fasciatus) abundance and distribution at Point
Peiee National Park, Canada. S.J. Hecnar and R J. Brooks, Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
ON, N1G 2W1; R.T. M'Closkey, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4.

The five-lined skink is widely distributed in eastern North America but its populations are disjunct and of conservation
concern in the northern portion of its range. Canadian populations are presently considered "vulnerable". We
studied effects of human disturbance on five-lined skinks at Point Peiee National Park, from 1990 to 1997.
Surveys Indicated low skink abundance and a lack of woody debris in areas heavily used by humans. A population
dedine, concurrent with high disturbance levels, occurred from 1990 to 1996. Skinks used woody debris as refuge
sites and showed preferential use of large moderately decayed logs and boards having greater surface area. Human
disturbance resulted in degradation and removal of debris. To test the hypothesis that skink absence in human high-
use areas was caused by a lack of suitable debris, we placed artificial microhabitats in areas which previously
lacked debris and skinks . Experimental boards were quickly colonized and heavily used despite high disturbance
rates. Results suggested that skinks are resilient to minor disturbances such as board displacements, but not to
removal or degradation of debris. Habitat restoration by moving large woody debris from open beach to the
stabilized dune began in 1996 and resulted in increased skink abundance in 1997.




   542                     ... . 14:30 Tuesday                                  CR1                     ..   . .CHM
The effects of road mortality on two threatened snake species on Peiee Island, Ontario. R.J. Willson. B.D.
Porchuk and R.J. Brooks, Department of Zoology. University of Guelph. Guelph. Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Road mortality is becoming an increasing threat to endangered and isolated reptile populations. Reptiles killed by
motorized vehicles and found on Peiee Island's roads (68 km in total) were collected and locations recorded from
1993 -1996. During the three years of intense surveys, the roads were scanned approximately every two days. In
1998, sections of road that had high numbers of roadkilled blue racers {Coluber constrictor mx'i) and eastern fox
snakes {Elaphe gloyd!) during the roadkill surveys, will be scanned intensively to determine suitable methods to
mitigate the effects of vehicular mortality. The blue racer is endangered in Canada, and threatened status for the
eastern fox snake is pending review. In three years 78 blue racers (11 adults/year) and greater than 100 eastern fox
snakes were found dead on Peiee Island's roads. Many adult females that are killed on the roads are moving to or
from shoreline oviposition sites. In the fall of each year, many hatchlings are also found dead on the roads. For
example, from 1993 - 1996, 75 hatchling eastern fox snakes were recorded as roadkills. As a result of continuing
development in the form of summer cottages, and growing tourism, vehicular traffic continues to increase on Peiee
Island's roads. Ths future impact of increased traffic flow and continued road mortality on the blue racer and eastern
fox snake remains to be seen. Our data suggest that road mortality will be a significant factor leading to the decline
of both snake species on Peiee Island.




   543                         14:45 Tuesday                                    CR1     .   .    . .           CHM
The Impact of roads on snake populations in eastern Texas. D.C. Rudolph. S.J. Burgdorf, R.R. Schaefer and
R.N. Conner, Soulhem Research Station, Box 7600, SFA Station, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 USA.

Radio-telemetry studies of timber rattlesnakes {Crotalus horridus) and Louisiana pine snakes {Pituophis mthvem}
suggested that mortality associated with roads was a significant factor in the biology of these species. An arialysis of
timber rattlesnake records in relation to road densities supported the hypothesis ffiat mortality associated with roads
has resulted in the extirpation of this species from significant portions of the landscape. The hypothesis that existing
road networks depress populations or large snake species was tested using a trapping protocol to sample snake
populations up to 850 m from road corridors. Preliminary results suggest that snake populations are reduced by 50%
or more up to a distance of 450 m from roads with moderate use. There was no indication that the population indices
had reached an asymptote at a distance of 850 m. For some species the data suggest that larger individuals are
located further from road corridors. Quantification of the road network on a landscape scale indicates that the large
snake fauna of eastern Texas Is subject to significant road related mortality that has the potential to reduce
populations by 50% ro more across a large proportion of the landscape.




                                16:30 Tbesaay                              ..   CR1                            CHM
Ami^lbians, r^ltes, and phosphate mining In Florida. H.R. Mushinsky and E.D. McCoy, Department of Biology
and Center for Urban Ecology, University of South Rorida, Tampa, Honda 33620, USA.

 Much of central Florida has been subjected to strip mining for phosphate. The mining process drastically alters the
upland habitats available for wildlife occupancy. We collected amphibians and reptiles at 30 unmined xeric upland
sites and 30 previously mined sites to determine which amphibians and reptiles may be under-represented at the
rwlaimed mined sites. Thirteen species of amphibians (4) and reptiles (9) were determined to be "focal species,"
that IS, they were under-represented at the reclaimed mine sites, relative to the unmined sites. Reasons for their
under-representation^ include the lack of suitable substrate for burrowing species, lack of temporary ponds for
amphibian reproductiOT, and lack of sufficient litter, ground cover, and plant structure for other species. Plans to
further study selected focal species, including translocating common species to reclaimed habitats will be reviewed.

   544                         15:30 Tuesday                                 CR1                               CHM
Habitat use, home ranges and hibernacula of the copperbelly water snake (Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta}
in southern Indiana and northwest Kentucky. C.J. Coppola and R.A. Kingsbury, Department of Biology, Indiana-
Purdue University, R. Wayne, IN 46805 USA.

The copperbelly is federally listed under the Endangered Species Act as Threatened in the northern part of its range,
and protected to the south by the Copperbelly Water Snake Conservation Agreement. Snakes from two populations
were radio-tracked at the Sloughs Wildlife Management Area, Kentucky, and in the Patoka National Wildlife Refuge,
Indiana. The movements of the snakes were monitored to elucidate patterns of home range size and habitat use.
including hibernacula sites. Habitat use was seasonally compared between sexes. Home ranges and activity
centers were calculated using minimum convex polygons. Individual snakes occupied widely different habitats,
demonstrated pronounced fidelity to selected habitats for much of the season. Buttonbush sloughs and areas of
shallow water with emergent vegetation were most frequently used, while closed canopy forested habitats away from
the sloughs and targe bodies or open water were not. Habitat use shifted towards palustrine forest edges as the
season progressed. The hibernacula of most snakes were crayfish burrows or stumps near or within the floodplain.




   545                         15:45 Tuesday                                 CR1                                CHM
Conservation of the endangered copperbelly water snake, Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta. B.A. Kingsbury.
Department of Biology, Indiana-Purdue University, Fort Wayne, IN 46805 USA.

The copperbelly is an inhabitant of shallow wetlands in parts of the midwestem United States. It is stats listed as
Endangered by Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio, federally listed as Threatened to ths north by ths US Rsh and Wildlife
Service, and protected in southern Indiana, southern Illinois, and Kentucky by a conservation agreement. Over the
last few years, efforts have dramatically increased to learn more about the species' ecological requirements to
prevent further losses of snakes or suitable habitat. I will review efforts to conserve the remaining populations of the
copperbelly. Discussion will include a review of fire current status of the snake, both in the legal and biological
senses, and a description of the conservation agreement. I will also examine the implications of research findings
from several studies out of my lab regarding management decisions about restoring and reclaiming habitat for the
species.




   546                         16:00 Tuesday .             .   .             CR1                                CHM
Long-term changes in movement patterns of massasauga rattlesnakes following a severe flood. R.A. Seiael
and MA. Pilgrim, Dept, of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana Univ., Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.

From 1979-1983 we conducted radiotelemetry and mark-recapture studies on massasauga rattlesnakes {Sistrurus
catenatus) at the Squaw Creek National Wildlife Refuge in northwestern Missouri. These data showed that snakes
hibernated in a moist prairie, moved away from the prairie to drier areas in the late spring and summer, and returned
to the prairie in the fall. In 1993, the refuge was impacted severely by the "Great fiffidwestem Rood"; massasauga
populations showed significant changes in population size strocture, sex ratio, mass-length relationships, and
reproduction as a result of this event. From 1996-1997 we re-examined the movement patterns of this population to
determine any addition^ effects of the flood. We found that although snakes still hibernate in the main prairie, very
few massasaugas leave the prairie for outlying areas, but remain in the prairie during the summer. In addition, the
number of massasaugas found crossing roads on the refuge has decreased dramatically, and the snakes that do
cross refuge roads are mainly neonates rather than adults as was seen in the earlier study. The implications for
these apparent changes in movement patterns for management and conservation will be discussed.




   550             ,   . .      13:30 Tuesday                               CF14                                AXL
Mi*SinTfn7S^ roS'                                              Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,


Hubbs and Miller's research on the Great Basin emphasized changes at the level of races and subspecies- these
^^ges apparently occurred rapidly, in hundreds to thousands of years. Miocene to Pleistocene fossils of these
fishes, in coritrast, suggest unexpectedly stow changes at the species level, i.e., over hundreds of thousands to
neari^y 10 million years, with infrequent evolution of new species. Resolution of this incongruence requires
danfication of the relative frequency of short-term differentiation, species origins, and extinction. The Great Basin
evidence demonstrates that fluctuating pluvial-interpluvial cycles result in rapid proliferation of new subspecies but
everitual extinction of all but generalist survivors, often as relict endemics. The frequent extinctions and infrequent
persistence of new speaes in the Great Basin seem to bo the consequence of repeated loss of habitat during
interpluvial stages of Pleistocene cycles. The result seems to be rapid but superficial changes in morphology without
lOTg-term charge. Great Basin fish faunas exhibit low diversity and high endemism characteristic of tectrxiically
active areas The low diyereity suggests that high extinction rales were caused by high elevations, high gradients
(low habitat diversity), and dimatic variability.                                                       • a a   543                         14:45 Tuesday                          .      CR1                               CHM
Th© impact of roads on snake populations in eastern Texas. P.C. Rudolph. S.J. Burgdorf, R.R. Schaefer and
R.N. Conner, Southern Research Station, Box 7600, SFA Station, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 USA.
Radio-telemetry studies of timber rattlesnakes (Cmtalus horridus) anti Louisiana pine snakes {Pituophis ruthvenl)
suggested that mortality associated with roads was a significant factor in the biology of these species. Ari ari^ysis of
tirnber rattlesnake records in relation to road densities supported the hypothesis mat mortality associated with mads
has resulted in the extirpation of this species from significant portions of the landscape. The hypothesis that existing
road networks depress populations or large snake species was tested using a trapping protocol to sample snake
populations up to 850 m from road corridors. Preliminary results suggest that snake populations are reduced by 50%
or more up to a distance of 450 m from roads with moderate use. There was no indication that the population indices
had reached an asymptote at a distance of 850 m. For some species the data suggest that larger individuals are
located further from road corridors. Quantification of the road network on a landscape scale indicates that the large
snake fauna of eastern Texas is subject to significant road related mortality that has the potential to reduce
populations by 50% ro more across a large proportion of the landscape.




  547                         16:30 Tuesday                               CR1                      CHM
Amphbians, reptiles, and phosphate mining in Florida. H.R. Mushinskv and E.D. McCoy, Department of Biology
and Center for Lfrban Ecolo^, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.