 oophorus (Belonlformes:Adrianichthyidae). J.S. Albert,
Department of Anatomy;, Nippon Medical School;, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku;, Tokyo 113 Japan.

Xenopoecilius oophorus is a member of the basal clade of Adrianichthyidae. In order to determine the size and
shape of brain regions in these fishes I used a 3-dimensional computer reconstruction system (TRI 3,10). To
preserve the original size of structures specimens virere immersion-fixed in 10% formalin and brains sectioned at 30
um (B on a cryostat. Outlines of 180 serial sections were traced to calculate the volume of one whole brain and six
brain regions; olfactory bulbs (BO), telencephala (TE). optic tecta (TO), inferior lobes (IL), cerebellum (CE), and facial
lobes (FL). Volumetric estimates from sampling every section were compared with estimates from sampling each
2nd, 4th and 8fh section, as well as from ocular micrometiy using linear measurements taken under a dissecting
microscope. Estimates from section sampling and ocular micrometry did not differ significantly from the complete
volumetric values. Estimates from ocular micrometry were derived from the ellipsoid model [V=1/6 pi’Iwdl (l=length,
w=width, and d=depth). except for the TO. which was estimated from [V=SA‘T] [SA=surface area, T=tnickness).
Estimates of total brain size derived by measuring the linear distance between the anterior margin of the
telencephalon and the obex did not differ significantly from estimates derived from weighing brains.




   655                        15:30 Wedresday                                  CF9                                CHM
Sturgeons and their parasites: the historical biogeography of a host-parasite association. A Choudhury.
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto. Ontario, M5S 3G5; TJt. Teny, Department of Zoology,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg.

Sturgeons (Osteichthyes: Acipenseridae) are evolutionaiy relicts with a wide distribution in the northern hemisphere.
The historical biogeography of their association with their diverse assemblage of host specific parasites is exploreri
using phylogenetic systematics and information from geology, paleontology and paleogeogtaphy. The patterns
indicate historical exchanges with a variety of host taxa and low levels of conspeciation, resulting in small clades of
vyidely distributed parasite species. Sister taxa of parasites generally exhibit allopatric patterns associated with
discrete iandrnasses and basins. A trans-Atlantic track involving Adpenser oxyrhynchus and A. sturio and a trans­
pacific track invoivirig A. medimstris are evident. The parasite relationships also support a historical connection
between North America and North Asian freshwater sturgeons (A. fulvescens and A. baeri or their ancestors) and the
biogeographical and phylogenetic relationship of A. mlvescens and A. brevirostrum. Based on these parascript
studies, it is hypothesized that a former contiguous distribution of Palaeartic and Neartic sturgeons was fragmented
by climatic and tectonic events in ths Tertiary causing displacement of the lake sturgeon lineage and its association
with the Gulf of Mexico drainages.




   656                        15:45 Wednesday                                 CF9                                CHM
Biogeography of giant bacteria and their surgeonfish (Acanthuridae) hosts in the north Pacific. W.L.
Mo^gomerv. P.E. Pollak, S. Treutner and T. Scarborough, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA 86011- 5640 USA; KJ3. Clements, School of Biological lienees. University of
Aimldand. PrivatA Rnn QPniQ Air'ktand Naut 7oaland

   652                       '14:15 Wednesday                                CF9                            . CHM
Pleomerism of vertebrae, fin rays, and scale rows In the gobiid fishes: observations and possible
explanations. A.S. Golubtsov. Severtsev Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Moscow 117071, Russia.

According to Lindsey (1975), pleomerism is a correlation among related animal species between their numbers of
meristic parts and their characteristic body sizes. Lindsey found a striking tendency for vertebral number to be
positively correlated with maximum length in many families of fish; however, he did not find the same correlation
among 36 species of the family Gobiidae in his analysis. Data on the maximum recorded size, numbers of vertebrae,
fin-rays (in dorsal,anal, and pectoral fins), and scales in longitudinal row were taken from published reviews of the
gobiid species occurring in the Indo-West-Pacific (120 species). South African (107), North East Atlantic (73), Black
Sea (26) regions. Not only vertebral numbers, but ail other counts appeared to be positively correlated with size of
gobiid species in the four regions. Taxonomic applications of this phenomena and possible evolutionary explanations
(e.g., life history correlates, structure of heritable morphological variation) are discussed.




   653                       14:30 Wednesday                                 CF9                               CHM
Functional morphology of pectoral fin locomotion in basal actinopteryglans. J.E. Janovetz. Department of
Organismal Biology and Anatomy,, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 USA; M.W. Westneat, Department of
Zoology,, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.

Fishes use their pectoral fins for a variety of locomotor functions including providing thrust for rectilinear movement
Most previous analyses of pectoral fin swimming in fishes have focused on the Peroiformes, a relatively derived
group. In this study we examine pectoral fin swimming in Polypterus palmas, Leplsosteus platostomus, and Amia
calva, representing three basal clades of ray-finned fishes. Both fonward and reverse swimming are analyzed to
reflect the wide range of behaviors during which fishes use their pectoral fins. Anatomical changes which have
occurred in the pectoral fin complex include duplication of musculature and the formation of a specialized fin ray to
act as the leading edge of the fin. Kinematically, the frequencies of fin beats and three-dimensional excursions of the
fin differ greatly between species. Electroinyograms reveal differences in the duration, relative timing, and amplitude
of activity in the pectoral muscles suggesting that motor patterns during swimming are not highly consenred in these
taxa. These data are compared with information from more derived taxa to trace the evolution of pectoral fin
swimming in actinopteryglans.




   654                       14:45 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
Geographic variation in the skeleton of the stoneroller, Campostoma anomalum. T.M. Cavender. Museum of
Biological Diversity. The Ohio State University, 1315 Kinnear Road, Columbus, OH 43212 USA.

Comparative osteology of the nominal species Campostoma anomalum was investigated across most of its
geographic range in North America. Considerable variation was found associated with the food cropping and food
processing mechanisms Qaws, pharyngeals) and bones associated with ths operation of these structures.
Transformations in character states (using Campostoma omatum and Dionda diaboli as outgroups) were found in the
laws, pharyngeals, suspensorium, opercular series, sphenotic, ethmoid, cranial roof and vertebral number. Results
from the skeletal analysis were interpreted as follows. Two broadly defined groups were recognized. One,
represented by Campostoma anomalum pullum, is widespread across the glaciated mid-section of North America
and southward in the plains region. The second is a complex of forms (represented in the upper Ohio Valley by
Campostoma a. anomalum) distributed in the Ohio River basin and peripheral areas to the east, south and west.
The sfonerollers found in the northern portions of the Ohio Valley can be pullum, anomalum or possible
intermediates between the two depending on the drainage system. The largescale stonerolier, C. 'oligolepid',
distributed in the Ozark uplands is a western component of the anomalum complex that is related to the similar but
slightly more derived Tennessee-Cumberland stoneroller.        The stoneroller that dominates the Tennessee-
Cumberland is the most derived form of the anomalum complex. It has peripheral (extensions?) in the Green River,
New River and on the gulf and east slopes. The name C. a. michauxi Fowler might apply to this form. Two of the
most recognizable populations within the anomalum complex have smaller distributional ranges. One is found in the
Roanoke-James and the other in the Ouachita drainage.




   653 ._________________ 13:15 Wednesday______________________ CF12                 _____________________ mcN
Sperm competition and the evolution of aRemative male life histories.              P. Fu. B.D. Neff and M.R. Gross,
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5,

Sperm competition is one vehicle by which males compete with each other for reproductive success. This paper
examines sperm competition between the specialized cuckolder and parental male life histories of bluegill sunfish
(Lepomis macrochirus). First, we find that the investment in total sperm production is higher in cuckolders frran
parentals and within cuckolders, males that have higher sperm production obtain higher fertilization success.
Second, the longevity of sperm is lower in cuckolders than parentals. The alternative male reproductive life histories
of bluegill therefore utilize sperm in different ways to compete for reproductive success. Cuokoiders invest in
quantity because they always face sperm competition, while parentals invest in quality because they only rarely face
sperm compeUtion. We compare these findings to those in other fishes by analyzing differences in sperni
competition intensities and sperm quantity-quality tradeoffs.   '651                       14:00 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
                                     Xmopoecilius oophorus (BelonIformesiAdrIanIchthyidae). J.S. Albed.
Department of Anatomy;, Nippon Medical School;, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku;, Tokyo 113 Japan.’ ’

                                                                  Adrianichthyidae. In order to determine the size and
 shape of brain regions in these fishes I used a 3-dimensional computer reconstruction system (TRI 3.10) To
 preserve the original size of structures specimens were immersion-fixed in 10% formalin and brains sectioned at 30
 um (B on a cryostat. Onlines of 180 serial sections were traced to calculate the volume of one whole brain and
                                       te'en'^Phala (TE), optic tecta (TO), inferi!,^^lob!! (l™Sr!b™(CEL and
Pnrt 4th^inH RfhSection were compared with estimates from sarnpling each
                                      “ frat" ocular micrometry using linear measurements taken under a dissecting
                                section sampling and ocular micrometry did not differ significantly from the complete
                                      oSufo;.hi'S'’ometty were denved from the ellipsoid model [V=1/6 pi’Iwd] (telength
                           except for the TO, which vyas esbmated from [V=SA*TI [SA=surfdce area, T=fliicknessT
Estimates of tot^ brain size denved by measunng the linear distance between the anterior maroin of the
telencephalon and the obex did not differ significantly from estimates derived from weighing brains.




   655                       15:30 Wednesday                                CF9                  . .   .      CHM .
Sturgeons and their parasites: the historical biogeography of a host-parasite association. A Choudhurv.
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5; T.A. Teny, Department of Zoology,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg.

Sturgeons (Osteichthyes: Acipenseridae) are evolutionaiy relicts with a wide distribution in the northern hemisphere.
The historical biogeography of their association with their diverse assemblage of host spedfic parasites is explored
using phylogenesc systematics and information from geology, paleontology and paleogeography. The patterns
indicate historical exchanges with a variety of host taxa and low levels of conspeciation, resulting in small dades of
widely distributed parasite species. Sister taxa of parasites generally exhibit allopatric patterns associated with
discrete landmasses and basins. A trans-Atlantic track involving Adpenser oxyrhynchus and A. sturio and a trans­
pacific track involving A. medirostris are evident. The parasite relationships also support a historical connection
between North America and North Asian freshwater sturoeons (A. fulvescens and A. baeri or their ancestors) and the
biogeographical and phylogeneric relationship of A. fulvescens and A. brevirostrum. Based on these parascript
studies, it is hypothesized that a former contiguous distribution of Palaeartic and Neartic sturgeons was fragmented
by dimatic and tectonic events in the Tertiary causing displacement of the lake sturgeon lineage and its association
with the Gulf of Mexico drainages.




   656                       15:45 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
Biogeography of giant bacteria and their surgeonfish (Acanthuridae) hosts in the north Pacific. W.L.
Montgomery. P.E. Pollak, S. Treutner and T. Scarborough, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA 86011- 5640 USA; K.D. Clements, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

Surgeonfishes harbor a group of gut symbionts that include the largest known Eubacteria (cell lengths of 30pm to
>500pm). Because the bacteria are acquired after larval surgeonfishes settle from the plankton, me fish/symbiont
system in the Hawaiian Archipelago and other north' Pacific locations provides an opportunity to address questions
about evolution of host and symbionts within and among hosts, within and among islands, and among island
systems. We have sunreyed microbes in host surgeonfishes from Hawaii, Maui, Oahu, Kauai, French Frigate
Shoals, Pearl & Hermes, and Midway Islands in the Hawaiian Archipelago, as well as from the Red Sea, Great
Barrier Reef, Tuvalu, Moorea (French Polynesia), Ishigaki Island (Japan) and Gulf of California. A variety of
structural morphs of the bacteria, differing in maximum size, cell shape, and the number and mode of formation of
daughter cells, have been recorded from all sites except the Gulf. There appears to be considerable consistency in
morphs occupying particular host species among the Hawaiian islands, but little consistency among island systems
in terms of morphs occupying given host species. Prelimin^ molecular studies suggest loca divergence of
microbes within a single host, at least for widely separated localities.




   657 .                     13:00 Wednesday                                CF12                              MCN
Parasites, life histories, mating systems. B.D. Neff, S. D'Amelio and M.R. Gross, Department of Zoology
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5.

Parasites may play an important role in fish life history and mating system evolution. This paper examines parasite
loads in a natural colony of bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochiiu^. All 8 parasite-types were quantified in selected
tissues of over 200 females, cuckolders and parentals (n= 16,438 parasites). Femdes and cuckolders have fewer
parasites than do parental males. Parental males that obtain nest sites within ths colony have fewer parasites than
unsuccessful parental males. Thus, parasites apparently determine parental male opportunity to breed, and sexual
selection for delayed maturation in parental males increases their average parasite loads. The evolution of the
mating system and life histories in this fish is therefore subject to forces of selection from parasites.

   654                       14:45 Wednesday                                CFO .                             CHM.,
^graphic variatlOTln^me skeleton of the stoneroller, Campostoma anomalum. TM Cavender Museum nf
Biological Diversity, The Ohio State University, 1315 Kinnear Road, Columbus, OH 43212 USA. *

Comparative osteology of the nominal species Campostoma anomalum was investioated acrns.s most nf its
geographic range in North America. Considerable variation was found associated with the food cronoina and food
                               Phanfngeals) and bones associated with the SJSrSSn            S ftmXr^s
terns                                   (using Campostoma omatum and Dionda diaboli as outgroups) were found in the
                      suspensonum, opercular series, sphenotic, ethmoid, cranial roof and vlrtebr^' nurnber Result!
                      analysis were interpreted as follows. Two broadly defined groups were recognized           One
Srt                                anomalum pullum, is widespread across the glaciated niid-sectionrrfNorlh AmerirS
                                          TP?            ® “’’’Plex o1 forms (represented in the upper Ohio Valley by
                                 distnbuted in the Ohio River basin and peripheral areas to the east, south and west^
The stonerollers found in the northern portions of the Ohio Valley can bo pullum, anomalum or possible
SSmldte® the n!!! nnte’Ti® .*>*«*'';«               ‘'’® drainage system. The largescale stoneroller, C. •ol^olepi^,
E tehnl?                  uplands is a western component of the anoma/um complex that is related to the similar but
rumhoriSJ.'dte t'ho''     3L®’?’'®®®®®"CJumb©rtand stoneroller.    The stoneroller that dominates the Tennessee-
                n! ih!                           ^oma/um complex. II has peripheral (extensions?) in the Green River
               J?''                      slopes. The name C. a. michauxi Fowler might apply to this form Two of the
R!!fi!k!SrmMandttIirth"®''*fh'"r?® a'’°'”a/um complex have smaller distributional ranges. One is found in the
Hoanoke-James and the other in the Ouachita drainage.




   658                      13:15.Wednesday                                CF12                              MCN
Sperm competition and the evolution of alternative male life histories.           P. Fu. B.D. Neff and M.R. Gross,
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5.

Sperm competition is one vehicle by which males compete with each other for reproductive success. This paper
examines sperm competition between the specialized cuckolder and parental male life histories of bluegill sunfish
{Lepixnis macrochirus). First, we find that the investment in total spemn produdion is higher in cuckolders ^an
parentals and within cuckolders, males that have higher sperm production obtain higher fertilization success.
Second, the longevity of spenn is lower in cuckdders than parentals. The alternative male reproductive life histories
of bluegill therefore utilize sperm in different ways to compete for reproductive success. Cuckolders invest in
quantity because they always face sperm competition, while parentals invest in quality because they only rarely face
sperm competition. We compare these findings to those in other fishes by analyzing differences in spenn
competition intensities and sperm quantity-quality tradeoffs.