  phylogenetic
                                                                                              o?has    hypotnes^ rar
                                                                                                               been
attributed to muted anatomical variation and a high degree of convergence/parallelism within Cichlidae. DNA
seouence data is presented corresponding to two regions of the mitochondnal genome for a representative sarnpling
of cichlid taxa, including all of the known Malagasy cichlids. The use of molecular sequence date results in a highly
resolved ohvlooenetic hypothesis for Cichlidae. However, support for higher-level relationships is relatively weak,
and may mdroX that differentiation in ancient cichlid lineages occurred over a relatively short hme
based on DNA sequence data indicate that the Malagasy cichlids (including tee Asian 9®"“®
monophyletic that tee Etropline cichlids (Etroplus from India/Sri Lanka and Pe^efrop/us from todagarear) tom a
nSuS^^up. and that the Ptychochromine cichlids (including Oigd^ia) are a monophyleho Malagasy assemblage.
Biogeography of the Malagasy cichlids, and Cichlidae in general, will also be discussed.




                                                                            GS4                               AXL
   266                         08:00 Sunday


and Fisheries Sciences, College Station, Texas, 77843, USA.
An amohibian survey was initiated at Brazos Bend State Park. Fort Bend County, Texas to assess ane^otel
observations of anuran population declines. From Febroaiy to July 1997,12 amphibian species were documented at
the paS' Sixty-nine sites used by amphibians were identified, of which 73% confain®d Bvid®ncei of              **
does not ap^ar that amphibian species are in decline at Brazos Bend State Park. In February 1998 350 metere of
PVC Dice were installed at selected sites to evaluate the effectivness of this te^nique in regard to hylid frog
populSions. These and other sites are currently being monitoring in order to gain insight to amphibian population
dynamics at Brazos Bend State Park.




                                                                            GS4                                AXL I
    267                         08:15 Sunday
 Amphibian species distribution patterns in an agriculturally-fr^ment^ tendsrape.                           and R K-
 Swihart. Dept Foresty and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159, USA.
 Aooarent declines of amphibian populations in many parts of the world have caused great concern 'n/^nt^are.
 This study was conducted to determine what effects agriculturally induced fragmentation of forestsi has h^ on
 amphfwan assei^lages and their distribution in a midwestem landscape. Poteritial breed™ P?®'® ®nd uptend
 areas in 30 forest patches of various sizes and degrees of isolation were intensively sampled for amph te^s fiw
 April through August 1996 and March through August 1997. Speaes present was dr^mented by using pitfall
 trapping, anuran vocalization sunreys, cover board sampling, minnow traps, and dipnetting for larva.
 Amohibian anuran and salamander assemblages were all nonrandornly distributed across the landsc^e.'
 americancus and Hyla versicolor were ubiquitous whereas the distribution of several species      Amby^ma
 ST a f^X, Plethodon cinereus. Rana clarrritans, and R. pipiens showed significant^ne^ngK
 soecies richness was significantly associated with a weighted measure of wetland permanency (WETWGT,
 D-0 0001 WETWGTC2 p=0.0029), with forest patches which have seasonal and semi-permanent w^lands
 c^nfSninq more species. PAbundanie of amphibians was significantly associated with forest proximity (LOSPR,
 □-0 0001 LOGPRC2 p=0.0037), with more isolated patches having greater amphibian ^undance. ^e_°bse
 SistribiSon Srd degree^of nStedness exhibited by Mveral amphibians suggests that these species respond to
 iandscape-levet factors.




                                 Q3:'15 SL.»\iay     ...        __________GS4           .                      -AXL
  Impacts of tknber harvesting on surface activity bi terrestrial salamanders. S.M. Knaco. CA Haas and R L
  Kirkpatrick, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virginia Tech. Blacksburg, VA 24061-0321.
 Terrestrial salamanders spend the majority of their time in cool, moist refugia underground, but must surface to
 forage and breed. Although little is known about their surface activity patterns, abundance is usually inferred by
 ■counts of surface active salamanders on wet nights. Recently, such counts have been used to assess tee impacts of
 timber hanresting on terrestrial salamanders. It is assumed in these studies that the peroent of the population active
 on the surface is not altered by the treatment. We tested this assumption by conducting a mark-recapture study on
 hanrested and control plots. We found significantly different proportions active between treatments. At one location,
 tee hanrested plot had a lower peroent active than its control (Plethodon cinereus: 4.0% vs. 9.2%, p=.O21; P.
 glutinosus: 3.8% vs. 11.7%, p=.O91). At the other location, the harvested plots had a higher percent active than their
 controls (P. cinereus: 4.2% and 3.9% vs. 1.6% and 1.3%, p=.O17). At this site, surface counts indicated there were
 more salamanders on ihe harvested plots than on tee controls, but mark-recapture estimates indicated there were
 actually twice as many salamanders on the control plots.

                               08:30 Sunday                                 GS4                                AXL
  268
Response of the herpetofaunal community to three sandhill restoration teeabnente on EgUn'
Florida. A.R. Litt. Department of Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of Florida, Box 110430, Gainesville,
FL 32611-430.
The longleaf pine ecosystem, once widespread in the southeastern United States, has been reduced by as riiuch as
98%. Restoration of this endangered ecosystem can be a mechanism for conservation, in ari attempt to rewrse
existing damage and create more resilient communities. Restoration metlKids implemented in sandfells rpust te
based in a deep knowledge of the ecosystem to effectively recreate and manage all aspects. ^°P®®9®®P^y;
restoration success can only be evaluated by examining community response. Since reptiles and                    ^®
occupy the ecosystem at a fairly small scale, these communities may              important indicatore of microhabi^
restoi^ion success. Previous work on herpetofaunal response to disturbance regimes has                          "J®
complexity of the effects and the importance of habitat structure. Habitat requirements for ®andhHI herpetof^na are
very diverse, demonstrating the need to closely examine these communities when making managemenr^ecisions.
My^stoidyTficus^ on reptiles and amphibia/is. is one portion of a rpulS-agency investigation of ’teree s^dhill
restoration techniques on Eglin Air Force Base, Rorida: fire, oak-speafio herbicide, and mechanic! oak fetag.
Pitfall traps and drift fences were used to capture reptiles and amphibians in restoration treatment areas, control
plots and "typical' longleaf pine sandhill areas during the summer of 1997. Animds were identified to specre^
marked, sexed, weighed, measured, and visually examined. Vegetative cover date were a so collated, ^e
obiective of this project is to examine heqjetofaunal species richness and abundance, as well as population age
class structure and sex ratios, with regards to the restoration treatment and vegetative stnicture.



                               08:45 Sunday                                 GS4.                               AXL
   269
 Anuran assemblages in anthropogenically and pyrogeniMlly dfeturbed landscgjes of the
boreal forest. J.M.Constible. Department of Biology, University of Victoria, PO Box 3020 STN, CSC, Victoria bg
V8W 3N5, Canada.
Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries Inc. (AL-PAC) operates a large pulp mill in the mixed-wood boreal forest of
northeastern Alberta. The company harvests within its 6,000,000 ha Forest Management Area (™A) usingan
'ecosystem manaqemenf perspective. In other words, AL-PAC attempts to mimic fire, the dominant ri^ui^
disturbahce of the boreal forest. Five amphibian species, including two that appear to have undergone population
declines occur in the FMA. In 1997,1 sampled anuran communities at 12 lakes to investigate whether each species
showed the same relative abundance in logged, naturally burned, and undistorbed areas. ®®?Pj°y®^
surveys transect sampling, egg and larval searches, and metamorph searches. Additionally, I conducted yegel^ on
surveys on each transect to quantitatively examine differences in habitat. Preliminary results suggest that lakes with
adjacent cutblocks support the highest number of amphibians; however, this may be a function of lake size, distance
from active roads, or forest type. An analysis to separate these effects is underway.




    270                         09:00 Sunday                 .               GS4
 The effects of    forest-pasture edges on the herpetofauna of Fila CruMS, Costa Rica.                M,A. Schlaepfer,
 Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-3001, USA.
 Human activities tend to create highly fragmented land^apes, thereby ®’TOsing                     nnrJnfetfons^U^sfnVa
 edges. I am interested in the impacts of forest-pasture edges on the dynamic of frog and tord                   Y®^®
 nafred-olot desiqn I described the abundance and distnbution of lizards (Norops. spp.) and leafJitter frogs
 ^Eleutherodactylus spp.) in 10 forest fragments near Las Cruces. Costa Rica. Pie study took place from Febroaiy to
 June 1997 and covered both dry and wet seasons. No species was defiriitively absent frorn tee edge plots.
 Nocturnal leaf-litter frogs were generally equally abundant near forest edges and lo forest intenors. The single dium^
 eleuteerodactylid speaes, however, was consistently more abund^t in the forest 'ntenore.
 edae effects may be stronger during the day than at night. Anolme lizards were more abundant at tee ed^s during
 tee dry season but became more abundant in forest interiors during the wet season. This seasonal vanation adds a
 new dfmension to our understanding of edge effects, and carnes important practical implications for fteure stodies.
 The reproductive period of the lizards, which coincides with the rainy season, as well as lower rates of parasitism on
 anoline lizards near edges, are offered as possible explanations for the observed seasonal pattern.




     274                       , 10:30'Sunday                                GS4                  ,             AXL
  Genetic diversity in drought-impacted populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Cleinmya marmorata
  pallida. C.M. Ingram and J.W. Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University. Lonq Beach
  Long Beach CA 90840-3702 USA.

  Populations that experience a large reduction in effective size are expected to exhibit a bottleneck effect which will
 include loss of heterozygosity and loss of alleles. Populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clemmys rrtarmorata
 pallida, in Central and Southern California were impacted by an extended drought teat occurred from 1987-1992 and
 exhibited local population size decreases up to 85% during this period. I examined changes in genetic diversity in
 four populations of C. mannorata in tee drought affected area by comparing microsatellite DNA allele frequencies
 from tissue samples collected before and after this drought period. Genotypes of five microsatellite loci were
 determined to assess tee genetic diversity within these samples. Heterozygosity was used as a measurement of
 genetic diversity. Although no significant decline in heterozygosity was shown in the five loci, there was a decrease
 in the number of alleles present in tee most severed impacted population. Since most individuals teat were present
 in ths post-drought samples were sun/ivors of tee drought, the first sign of decreased genetic diversity would be tee
 loss of alleles. Changes in tee level of genetic diversity (heterozygosity) would only be detectable in subsequent
 post-drought generations.Amphibian species distribution patterns in an agricutturalty-fra^ented iandscape. M.B, Kolozsvarv and R.K.
Swihart, Dept. Foresty and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159, USA.
Apparent declines of amphibian populations in many parts of the world have caused great concern in recent years.
This study was conducted to determine what effects agriculturally induced fragmentation of forests has had on
amphibian assemblages and their distribution in a midwestem landscape. Potential breeding pools and upland
areas in 30 forest patches of various sizes and degrees of isolation were intensively sampled for amphibians from
April through August 1996 and March through August 1997. Species presence was documented by using pitfall
trapping, anuran vocalization surveys, cover board sampling, minnow traps, and dipnetting for larva.
Amphibian, anuran and salamander assemblages were all nonrandomly distributed across the landscape. Bufo
americancus and Hyla versicolor were ubiquitous whereas the distribution of several species including Ambystoma
tigrinum, A. texanum, Plethodon cinereus, Rana clamitans, and R. pipiens showed significant nesting. Overall,
species richness was significantly associated with a weighted measure of wetlano permanency (WETWGT,
p=0.0001, WETWGTC2, p=0.0029), with forest patches which have seasonal and semi-permanent wetlands
■containing rhore species. Abundance of amphibians was significantly associated with forest proximity (LOGPR,
p=0.0001, LOGPRC2, p=0.0037), with more isolated patches having greater amphibian abundance. The observed
distribution and degree of nestedness eidiibited by several amphibians suggests that these species respond to
landscape-level factors.




   271                       .. 09:15 Sunday. .                             CJS4                       AXL
Impacts of timber harvesting on surface activity in terrestrial salamanders. S.M. Knapp. C.A. Haas and R.L.
Kirkpatrick, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 -0321.

Terrestrial salamanders spend ths majority of their time in cool, moist refugia underground, but must surface to
forage and breed. Although little is known about their surface activity patterns, abundance is usually Inferred by
counts of surface active salamanders on wet nights. Recently, such counts have been used to assess the impacts of
timber harvesting on terrestrial salamanders. It is assumed in these studies that the percent of the population active
on the surface is not altered by the treatment. We tested this assumption by conducting a mark-recapture study on
harvested and control plots. We found significantly different proportions active between treatments. At one location,
the harvested plot had a lower percent active than its control (Plethodon cinereus: 4.0% vs. 9.2%, p=.O21; P.
glutinosus: 3.8% vs, 11.7%, p=.O91). At the other location, the harvested plots had a higher percent active than their
controls (P. cinereus: 4.2% and 3.9% vs. 1.6% and 1.3%, p=.O17). At this site, surface counts indicated there were
more salamanders on ths harvested plots than on ths controls, but mark-recapture estimates indicated there were
actually twice as many salamanders on the control plots.




■ .272     .                    09:30 Sunday                                GS4                                AXL
Gopher tortoise {Gophenis polyphemus} movement patterns In large and small habitats: how much land Is
enough? J.O. Ott. Department of Zoology, Auburn University, Auburn AL 36849, USA., JW Jones Ecological
Research Center, Ichauway, RR 2 Box 2324 Newton, GA 31770, USA; W.K. Miohener, JW Jones Ecological
Research Center, Ichauway, RR 2 Box 2324 Newton, GA 31770, USA; M.T. Mendonga and C. Guyer, Department of
Zoology, Auburn University, Auburn AL 36849, USA.
The geographic range of the gopher tortoise has declined due to habitat desfroction and fragmentation. Protection
strategies typically include preserving patches of habitat or conserving areas occupied by tortoises, even if those
areas are restricted in size and quality. However, the patterns observed in these sites can differ from those in large,
contiguous areas where conditions may more closely resemble those under which the spedes evolved. We tracked
131 tortoises via radio-telemetry for one year on an 11,700 ha longleaf pine reserve in southwest Georgia. Male
tortoises utilized an average of 9.3 + 4.6 burrows and traveled an average total distance of 83.7 + 73.8 m during the
study period. Females utilized 4.8 ± 2.4 burrows and traveled 48.2 ± 57.7 m. The longest movemements were 6.4 km
by a male tortoise and 480 m by a female. The results of this study emphasize the need to preserve large,
contigucHJs habitats for use by gopher tortoises. Furthermore, it suggests that movement by tortoises is limited in
smair habitats, especially those surrounded by vast inhospitable areas. Data gathered within large study sites may
provide better information for the long-term preservation of this species.




   273                         09:45 Sunday                                 GS4                                AXL
Intraspecific phylogeny of the lizard Cnemidophorus sexlineatus: To conserve or not?                      P. Razzano.
Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.
Mitochondrial DNA sequence analyses were used to inter phylogeographic relationships among individuals of the
lizard species Cnemidophorus sexlineatus, as well as to determine whether a population of C. sexlineatus in
Michigan is endemic or recently introduced. Individuals were obtained from Colorado, Oklahoma, Indiana, Michigan,
and Florida. A PCR generated fragment which spans the mtDNA ND3 to ND4 gene region, and including the
Argenine fRNA, was sequenced for each individual. Sceloporus grammicus and C. gularis sequences were used as
outgroups.
The preliminary data cannot rule out the possibility that the Michigan population is endemic. The Florida individuals
are in a dade basal to a clade that contains Micnigan, Indiana, and Oklahoma individuals. Sequence divergence
values of the Michigan specimens range from 1.2% to 5.8%. The Indiana and Oklahoma specimens have sequence
divergence values of 1.6% to 2.3% and 1.1% to 1.5% respectively. One Colorado sample forms a clade with the C.
gularis sample, its sequence divergence is 8.3%.

                                               I II, II, 11

The effects of     forest-pasture edges on the herpetofauna of Fila Cruces, Costa Rica.                MA Schlaepfer.
Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-3001, USA.
Human activities tend to create highly fragmented landscapes, thereby exposing remaining habitat to the effects of
edges. I am interested in the impacts of forest-pasture edges on the dynamics of frog and lizard populations. Using a
paired-plot design, I described the abundance and distribution of lizards {Norops. spp.) and leaf-lifter frogs
{Eleutherodactylus spp.) in 10 forest fragments near Las Cruces, Costa Rica, The study took place from February to
June, 1997, and covered both dry and wet seasons. No species was definitively absent from the edge plots.
Nocturnal leaf-litter frogs were generally equally abundant near forest edges and in forest interiors. The single diurnal
eleutherodactylid species, however, was consistently more abundant in the forest interiors, suggesting that abiotic
edge effects may be stronger during the day than at night. Anoline lizards were more abundant at the edges during
the dry season, but became more abundant in forest interiors during the wet season. This seasonal variation adds a
new dimension to our understanding of edge effects, and carries important practical implications for future studies.
The reproductive period of the lizards, which coincides with the rainy season, as well as lower rates of parasitism on
anoline lizards near edges, are offered as possible explanations for the observed seasonal pattern.




   2/4                       10.30 Surid^iy                             C3S4       .     . .               AXL
Genetic diversity in drought-impacted populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clommys marmorata
pallida. C.M. Ingram and J.W. Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, Long Beach.
Long Beach CA 90840-3702 USA.

Populations that experience a large reduction in effective size are expected to exhibit a bottleneck effect which will
include loss of heterozygosity and loss of alleles. Populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clemmys marmorata
pallida, in Central and Southern California were impacted by an extended drought that occurred from 1987-1992 and
exhibited local population size decreases up to 85% during this period. I examined changes in genetic diversify in
four populations of C. marmorata in the drought affected area by comparing miorosatellite DNA allele frequencies
from tissue samples collected before and after this drought period. Genotypes of five microsatellite loci were
defemiined to assess the genetic diversity within these samples. Heterozygosity was used as a measurement of
genetic diversity. Although no significant decline in heterozygosity was shown in the five loci, there was a decrease
in the number of alleles present in the most severed impacted population. Since most individuals that were present
in the post-drought samples were sunrivors of the drought, the first sign of decreased genetic diversity would be the
loss of alleles. Changes in the level of genetic diversity (heterozygosity) would only be detectable in subsequent
post-drought generations.




   275      ...        .        10:45 Sunday                                 GS4                                 AXL
Amphibian abundance and community structure in fragmented peat bogs.                    M.J. Mazerolle. Department of
Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4J1.
Peatlands are increasingly exploited in Europe and North America due to the demand for peal in horticulture. As a
result, these wetlands are threatened, particularly in New Bronswiok and Quebec, North America's principal peat
producers. I used drift fences and pitfall traps to investigate amphibian populations in pristine bogs and disturbed
bogs (i.e., bog remnants adjacent to peat harvesting operations) of southeastern New Brunswick. Results following
20, 592 trap nights indicate that species richness is higher in pristine bogs than disturbed bogs (range 2-7 spp.).
Rana clamitans was the only specieS sensitive to peat harvesting, while the abundance of Rana sylvatica, Rana
pipiens, Bufo americanus americanus and Rana septentrionalis did not differ between pristine bogs and bog
fragments. Captured individuals consisted almost exclusively of ranid Juveniles in both types of bogs. These data
show that peat bog harvesting has a definite influence on adjacent amphibian communities. However, additional
work will be needed to differentiate natural population fluctuations from the impacts of peat harvesting on amphibian
movements and resource (i.e., bog ponds) utilization. *




    276                         .11:00 Sunday                             GS4                            AXL
Forest canopy closure and dispersal by pool-breeding amphibians.           P.G. deMavnadier and M.L. Hunter(Jr.),
Department of Wildlife Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, Maine, 04469, USA.
For amphibians that breed in temporary pools. Juvenile dispersal is an important life history movement linking the
aquatic habitat of larvae to the surrounding forest habitat occupied by most adults. We examined whether selection
occurs for closed-canopy conditions during dispersal using pitfall traps and drift fences to sample naturally occuning,
upland populations of wood frogs {Rana sylvatica) and spotted salamanders {Ambystoma maculatum) along recently
created forest-clearcut edges in central Maine. Habitat preferences during dispersal were further investigated using
an experimental approach that quantified the movements of newly metamorphosed wood frogs cultured in artificial
pools located along an abropt forest-powerline edge. Among natural populations the abundance of Juveniles and
adults of both species declined sharply across a gradient running from relatively mature forest-interior habitat (70-90
years old) to recently clearcut habitat (2-11 years old). Similarly, in the powerline experiment. Juvenile wood frogs
showed a dispersal preference for closed-canopy habitat immediately upon metamoqjhosis, with the highest capture
rates occum'ng in microhabitats characterized by dense foliage in both the understory and canopy layers. Our
results suggest that populations of wood frogs, spotted salamanders, and other vernal pool breeding amphibian
species are likely to benefit from efforts to maintain connectivity between upland forest habitats and aquatic breeding
sites.                             11:15 Sunday                               GS4                             AXL
  277
Enhemeral aauatic habitats in tallgrass prairie: abiotic changes over time and their effects oni developmental
rme of western chorus frogs. N.M. Gerlanc, Division of Biology, 232 Ackert Hall. Kansas State University,
Manhattan, Kansas 66506 USA.
Bison wallows and intermittent streams were sampled weekly in spring 1996 and 1997^oriKonra
Natural Area, Kansas. We monitored water chemistry and development of western choms frogs (Pseu^OTS
triseriata^ as these aauatic habitats dried. Abiotic factors temporally were rnore variable iri bison wallows than in
intermittent streams even after flow stopped. Dissolved oxygen and ammonium fluctuated dium^ly in wallows, but
re“ s"n' infeXrt streaS? until just before /rylng.                      Water temperature ancphwem o°rrel^ed
nonntlvBlv to water volume in wallows, but not in streams. Eggs in bison wallows hatched at Go^er stages 21 and
22^iMthh 4 to 8 days after laying, whereas eggs in intermittent streams hatched in 14 days at abo^ Gosner stage
21      The rnaioriN of tadpoles in wallows reached Gosner stages 38 to 42 in 6 weeks, "hen waHows dned In
contrast tadpole development in streams progressed no further than stage 25 until flow_in_^^^ms, rjase^ no
tadooles vie^ beyond stage 41 when the streams dried after 16 weeks. Differences in developmental rates d these
fri^s likely resultfrom differences in water temperature and chemistry between ephemeral aquatic habitats found in
wallows and streams.




                                                                             GS4                               AXL
   278 .                        11:30 Sunday
The post-breeding migration of the European comrnon frog, Rana                                              structure
and seasonal weather. R. Tramontano. Ecology Building, Lund University, 223 62 Lund, SWEDEN.

The post-breeding migration of Flana iemporaria was studied by means of radio tracking over_3®!1®
consisted of an extensive ungrazed, uncut moist meadow where suitable foraging habitats and the Iroeding site
wTre all contiqSouTwtth each other, while in another site suitable habitats were ^parated by cultivated fields. The
study period of the first year coincided with a drought, while the study penods of the following two yeais had above
norrnal oreoioitation This enabled a factorial analysis of the effects of seasonal weather, landreape twe and sex on
miarato™^ehavior In the farmland site and during the wet years frogs moved farther from their breeding pond and
qources^f ooen water changed position more often and made longer movements when position w^ changed. In
the farmland site frogs also migrated farther and did so more directly. Nearly all differences between sitM were rnore
mdrSIIe during the wet year. There were no significant differences between the sexes, neither were any of fee
differ^ces betoeen habitets or wet and dry years sex dependent. These migration patterns are
of fee effects of habitat fragmentation on species survival and the consequences for dispersal between breeding
populations.




                                                                             GS4                                AXL
    279                          11:45 Sunday
 Influence of weather variables on movement patterns of the Northwestern salamander {Ambystoma gracile}.
 A.B. Stringer. University of VKashington, Box 352100, Seattle, WA USA.
 The influence of weather on salamander breeding activity has been well documented . However, w^eather influent
 on soecific movement patterns is not yet well understood. I investigated the influence of weather vanables on
 movements of Northwestern salamanders. Radio-tracking was conducted during the winter when this species s
 most active Both non-breeding and breeding migration movements were observed. Movements were( sigrafiran^
 correlated with both temperature increase and rain onset. This re ationship was strongest when a cold, dty penrfe
 was followed by a warm, wet period. Movements began when daily temperatures rose above a mean of 5°C a™ a
 mfeimum of 0°^, a”d more than 20mm of rain had fallen within fee last 24 hours. Dunng these penods most
 radio-fagged salamanders moved within 48 hours of the weather change and of each other. Breeding ra pratiOT
 movements were also correlated with this type of weather change and migration onset invanably began wrthin 48
 hours of the first winter thaw. Subsequent cold, dry periods were observed to temporenly suspend
 movements During extended periods of warm rainy weather, correlations between weather vanables and
 movements were rnuch weaker and tended to be better explained by individual salamander movement frequency
 patterns.




     263                         16:30 Sunday                                 P3                               .PCH
  Project Piaba- study floodplain fishes and turtles for a sustainable livelihood of riverine people in the mid­
  Rio Negro Basin, Amazonas, Brazil. N.L. Chao. R.C. Vogt, M.L. Aradjo and G. Prang, Universidade do
  Amazonas.
  Roodplain fishes in fee mid-upper Rio Negro are exploited as ornamental fishes to provide subsistence to 3000
  people in Baroelos, Amazonas (pop. 12,000; area 122,490 km’). Turtles and their eggs are the second most
  important protein resource, next to fish. This fishery constitutes over 60% of fee economic activity of the region.
  About 60 species and 20 million fishes are captured for the trade annually. A single species, the cardinal tetra
  {Paracheirodon axelrodi}, made up more than 70% of fee catch. Over fishing in some areas may be attributed to
  lack of rural employment since other extractive economies have collcujsed. Thus more people are involved in the
  fishery. El Nifio, now, as in 1982-3, is probably the principal cause of the drastic decline of the fishery. Our goals
  are to understand fee biology of this community so feat a management plan can be devised to use these resources
  on a sustainablejevel. To accomplish these goals we are studying the biodiversity and biology of the species of
  fish used in the ornamental fish trade, fee tumes used as food and trade, and the social-economic aspects of this
  fishery. It may be possible to use this resource as well as presenre it.

                                16:00 Sunday                                 P3                                PCH
  280
Nitrate pollution: A serious threat to amphibian survival.         J.p. Rou^ ^d C.A. Bishop, Canadian Wildlife
Service, Environment Canada, Box 5050, Burlington, Ontario, L7R- 4A6: J. Struger, Ecosystem Health Divison,
Environment Canada, Box 5050, Burtington, Ontario, L7R 4A6.
Nitrogen pollution from anthropogenic sources enters water bodies through runoff associated with nitrate fertilization,
livestcxtk, precipitafion, and effluents from industrial, human and animal wastes. This review
for nitrate to affect amphibian populations by comparing environmental concentrations d^nitrate in Northi Amen
waters to nitrate concentrations known to cause toxicity to captive amphibians and other speaes that
important role in amphibian eodogy. Lethal and sublethal effects in amphibians are det^ted^t nrtrate
between 2.5 and 100 mg/L. We found environmental concentrations of nitrate in watersheds Ihroughod North
America from <1 to >100 mgA.. Furthermore, amphibian food (insects) and predators (fish) are dso afleded by
these elevated levels of nitrate in surface wafers. From this we conclude that nitrate Mncentrafion^n watershed^n
North America are high enough to cause death and developmental anomalies in amphibians. In
 use of vegetated buffer strips adjacent to water courses can reduce nitrogen contamination d si^a“'and
 Ultimately’there is a need to reduce the use of fertilizers, control the lun-off of human and livestock waste and
 establish and enforce water quality guidelines for nitrate for the protection of aquatic life.




                                16:00 Sunday                                  P3                                PCH
   281
Relation of catch per unit of effort and floodplain lakes area in Amazm.               A-R. Caiyalhg, Prograrna de P6s-
Graduacao em Ecd^ia de Ambientes AquSticos , Continentals, Nupelia - Nucleo de Pesquisas emi Limnologia
Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade Esfadual de Maring^; V.S. Batista, Departamento de Engenharia de
Pesca, Faouldade de Ciencias AgiArias , Universidade do Amazonas.
                                                                                                                           1
The floodolain area of 32 lakes in Lower SolimSes River (Amazon) was quantified using a radar image SAR (JERS-
1) in order to stablish correlations among these areas and fee catch per unit of effort -CPUE (total and by species) in
the lakes (effort unit = fisherman numbers 'fishery days),                                                     - W
fisherman Results showed correlation between the lake area and its floodplain area (n-32, Pearson r --
p<0 05) while there was a weak correlation of meander number and lakes floodplain area (n=32; ’'=0,4, ns),
fee lake perimeter was correlated with all variables. Catch data shows that just CPUEtot^^wasi cotoIated with t
floodolaiii area (Soearman r =0,69: p<0,05; n=8). Lacustnne species and nverine-lacustnne species did not show
correlation wife the others variables (floodplain area, lake area, perimeter and meander number). However, ^rre
Amazon fishes distribution is dependent on many others variables (fiMdplain forest size and diversity, ecow^em
priinaty production, etc.) those correlations need to be investigated based on larger sample size in order to
determinate standards.




                                 16:00 Sunday.                                 P3                               PCH
  . 282
 Artisanal fisheries in a urban reservoir: catch, effort and fishing strategies (Billing resereoir, ^o Paulo,
 Brazil) C V. Minte-Vera°'‘*. •Prograrna de Pds-Graduagao em Ecologia, UNICAMP - Universidade Estadu^ de
 Ca?npinas;M: Petre re, Depto. de Ecologia, UNESP -Universidade^^Estadual.Paifiista;present address: , Nupdlia -
 Nucleo de Pesquisas em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquiculture , UEM -Universiadade Estadual de ManngS.
 Rillinns reservoir (127 km2 23° 42' - 23° 45'S: 46° 27'- 46° 22'W) is the largest water body in the metropolitan region
 of S^ PaufotBrazil). Its building started in 1925 in order to supply fee city of Sao Paulo wife electncity. Dunng rnany
 years it presented low environmental quality due to fee reception of organic sewage froin the metropofitan re^on-
 JTowadays, it is has multiple uses. An intense artisanal fishery activity is present, with 191 fishermen. Laings were
 recorded daily during a year (1996). During this period 147,593 kg of fish were caughfen 3,515 fishing trips by 21.5
 fehemarVmonth in Average, wife a yield of 42 kgrtiip and 572 kg4Ishermanlfeonfe. The mam commeraalI sprcies
 caught were Nile tilapia Oreochomis niloticus (81.4% of landings in weight), ®9je‘r°'Lu':ed species, lamban
 Asfranax e/genmanniorum (13.0%) and four other species. Tilapias were caught wife castnets and beatinsI g^a^s.
 fee^ther species were caught with gillnets. Through a Principal Component Analysis it was Possible'
 mill? groups of fishermen considering the fisheries strategies, those who ery lore only tilapias and those^who emlore
       the other soedes related mainly to the ownership of fee gears. The low nohness and high dominance of few


 - Fundo Nacional do Meio Ambiento, Brasil)




     2S6         . . ..           16,00 Sunday                                 'P3 .                             PCH
  Recreational freshwater fishing In southwestern Australia. S.J. Hambleton. Murdoch University, Perth, Western
 Australia, 6150.

  The south-west coast of Australia (Darling Botanical District), as defined by the 800mm isohyet, has an area of
 some 160,000 square kilometres and 19 distinct river drainage basins. In comparison to habitats of soufeeastem
 Australia and fee Northern Hemisphere, southwestern Australia has a much reduced aquatic faunal diversity: the
 freshwaters of this region contain only 10 species of native fishes, of which eight are endemic. Wife the exception of
 Tandanus bostocki (a freshwater cattish) none of these species typically exceed 140mm in total length. This very
 low number of freshwater fish species in southwestern Australian waters is thought to be a result of the regions arid
 past climate, insular nature, low and relatively featureless topography, and low productivity of its aquatic habitats.
 The regions recreational freshwater fishery currently comprises fee introduced perch (Perea fluviatilis} and trouts
 {Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss}, and the native decapod, Cherax tenuimanus, the third largest freshwater
 crayfish. Preliminary data suggests the temperate climate of the south-west promotes fast growth-rates of perch^et
 shortens the period during which their spawning is successful, relative to Northern Hemisphere populations. This
 paper also discusses fee likely impact of P. fluviatilis on the established C. tenuimanus fishery, given that at times
 P. fluviatiHs preys almost exclusively on this crayfish species.radio-tagged salamanders moved within 48 hours of the weather change and of each other. Breeding migration
movements were also correlated with this type of weather change and migration onset invariably began within 48
hours of the first winter thaw. Subsequent cold, dry periods were observed to temporarily suspend migrational
movements. During extended periods of warm rainy weather, correlations between weather variables and
movements were much weaker and tended to be better explained by individual salamander movement frequency
patterns.




Project Plebe- study floodplain fishes and turtles for a suatalnabls livelihood of riverine people In the mld-
RIo Negro Basin, Amazonas, Brazil. N.L. Chao. R.C. Vogt, M.L. Araujo and G. Prang, Universidade do
Amazonas.
Floodplain fishes In the mid-upper Rio Negro are exploited as ornamental fishes to provide subsistence to 3000
people in Barcelos, Amazonas (pop. 12,000; area 122,490 km^). Turtles and their eggs are the second most
Important protein resource, next to fish. This fishery constitutes over 60% of the economic activity of the region.
About 60 species and 20 million fishes are captured for the trade annually. A single species, the cardinal tetra
(Paracheirodon axelrod!), made up more than 70% of the catch. Over fishing in some areas may be attributed to
lack of rural employment since other extractive economies have collapsed. Thus more people are involved in the
fishery. El Nino, now, as in 1982-3, is probably the principal cause of the drastic decline of the fishery. Our goals
are to understand the biology of this community so that a management plan can be devised to use these resources
on a sustainable level. To accomplish these goals we are studying the biodiversity and biology of the species of
fish used in the ornamental fish trade, the turtles used as food and trade, and the social-economic aspects of this
fishery. It may be possible to use this resource as well as preserve it.




  .284                          16:00 Sunday                                 P3                . .            PCH
Response of salamander distribution to forest canopy gaps created by selective timber harvesting.                M.T.
Messere. Department of Biology, Albany University, Albany, NY 12206 USA; P.K. Ducey, Department of Biological
Sciences, SUNY at Cortland, Cortland, NY 13045 USA.
Selective timber harvesting (removal of individual frees or small groups of trees), which creates gaps in the forest
canopy, is widely practiced in public and private forests. However, the effects of this technique on herpetofaunal
populations has been incompletely studied. We examined the effect of forest canopy gaps, created by selective
harvesting, on the distribution of ths northern redback salamander, Plethodon cinereus, in a maple-hemlock forest in
central New York State. Distributions of individual salamanders were determined by searching 1 m x 1 m quadrats
along transects extending from the center of gaps into the surrounding forest. In the first year following harvest, we
found that salamander distributions did not indicate significant movement from or avoidance of gap sites. However,
salamander densities were somewhat elevated on ths edges of gaps. Data for the second year following harvest
are being analyzed.




   285                         16:00 Sunday                                  P3                               PCH
A new database available for herpetological research: Natural history and geographic distribution records
from herpetological review. J.A. Feinberg and R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead,
NY, USA, 11549.
We entered citation infomiation for all natural history and geographic distribution records from Herpetological Review
(HR), from its first issues to the present. Citations indude authors, species, keywords, and locality information. The
Hr database is available to anyone with WWW access, and can be searched in a variety of ways. This makes
preliminary literature research much quicker and more thorough than was previously possible. For example, when a
herpetologist finds a spedmen believed to be new for a county, it is now easy to determine if the species has already
been reported forthat region in HR. The HR database will be updated continually as new issues become available.
As an example of the value of this database, we examined new county record data for a collection of species {Rana
catesbeiana, Hemidactylus turcicus, and Trachemys scripta) that are commonly introduced to new areas outside
their native range. The results show the pattern of range expansion differs among the three spedes.

fisherman/month in average, with a yield of 42 kg/trip and 572 kg/fisherman/month. The main commercial species
caught were Nile tilapia Oreochomis niloticus (81.4% of landings in weight), an introduced species, "lambari”
As^inax eigenmannionim (13.0%) and four other species. Tilapias were caught with castnets and beating gillnets,
the other species were caught with gillnets. Through a Principal Component Analysis it was possible to detect two
main groups of fishermen considering the fisheries strategies, those who explore only tilapias and those who explore
also the other species, related mainly to the ownership of the gears. The low richness and high dominance of few
species on landings are indicative of communities under stressing condition. The dominance-okNile tilapia is
attributable to a combination of factors as ability to consume plankton and tolerance to low dissolved oxygen
contents. (Financial agencies: CNPq -Conselho Nadonal de Desenvdvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico,6rasil; FNMA




Recraatlonal frashwater flabing In soutfiwastern Australia. S.J. Hambleton. Murdoch University. Perth, Western
Australia, 6150.
 The south-west coast of Australia (Darling Botanical District), as defined by the 800mm isohyet, has an area of
some 160,000 square kilometres and 19 distinct river drainage basins. In comparison to habitats of southeastern
Australia and the Northern Hemisphere, southwestern Australia has,a much reduced aquatic faunal diversity; the
freshwaters of this region contain only 10 species of native fishes, of vvhich eight ate endemic. With the exception of
Tandanus bostocki (a freshwater cattish) none of these species typically exceed 140mm in total length. This very
low number of freshwater fish species in southwestern Australian waters is thought to be a result of the regions arid
past climate, insular nature, low and relatively featureless topography, and low productivity of its aquatic habitats.
The regions recreational freshwater fishery currently comprises the introduced perch (Perea fluviatilis) and trouts
(Salmo tnitta, Oncorhynchus mykiss), and the native decapod, Cherax tenuimanus, the third largest freshwater
crayfish. Preliminary data suggests the temperate climate of the south-west promotes fast growth-rates of perch, yet
shortens the period during which their spawning is successful, relative to Northern Hemisphere populations. This
paper also discusses the likely impact of P. fluviatilis on the established C. tenuimanus fishery, given that at times
P. fluviatilis preys almost exclusively on this crayfish species.




   287                          16:00 Sunday                         .    .   PS                              PCH
Combining herpetofaunal education and conservation efforts in the NY State amphibian and reptile Atlas.
P.K. Ducey and M. Chapman, Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Cortland, Cortland, NY, 13045, USA.
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation has been directing the NY Amphibian and Reptile
Atlas, a state-wide, ten-year survey of the herpetofaunal populations which relies heavily on volunteer participation.
Using an SSAR grant-in-aid-of-herpetology for education, we initiated a project to increase the educational value of
the Altas for young people and to increase their partidpafion as contributors. To encourage participation, biology
teachers in over 70 high schools were contacted directly with information about the project. Other teachers were
reached via a museum exhibit at SUNY Cortland and a web page. The web page (www.cortland.edu/herp/) contains
identification keys and photographs of local spedes, information about the Atlas, and web resource links.
Participating high school classes also received educational packets containing frog call tapes, books to aid field
identification, field survey tips. Atlas handbooks and newsletters, and information on herpetofaunal conservation.
Students from across the state are now participating.




   288                         16:00 Sunday                           .   . ..P3                               PCH
The fish survey: A key management component for the Canadian environmental effects monitoring
program. S.C. Ribev. S.L. Walker and E. Porter, Environment Canada, National EEM Office, 351 St. Joseph Blvd,
Sth Floor, Hull, Quebec KIA 0H3.
In 1992, the Canadian government passed amendments to the Pulp and Paper Effluent Regulations (PPER) under
the Fisheries Act, which included a requirement for mills to conduct an Environmental Effects Monitoring (EEM)
program. The purpose of EEM is to assess the adequacy of national regulations for protecting fish, fish habitat and
the use of fisheries resources. One key component of EEM is a fish survey (FS), which involves sampling two
sentinel species from an exposure area and examining gross population oharaderisfics. EEM requirements specify
growth, reproduction and survival as key assessment endpoints for fish. The primary objective of the first sunrey
(Cyde 1) was to determine variability in the measured parameters and determine sample sizes using power analysis
for subsequent cycles. Following the completion of Cycle 1, a number of refinements to the EEM program have
been implemented. The purpose of this paper is to review the changes to the FS component of EEM and discuss
the use of the FS data in decision making. Difficulties with the FS component and alternative approaches to the fish
survey {e.g., mesocosms) currently being explored will also be presented.                                                                              P3                                  PCH
  289 .                         16:00 Sunday
Bomb craters and roaring F-15s: An aquatic faunal survey and nonindigenous species asse^ment of Ayon
Pafk Air F^rVRa^^t" Florid “ J.D. Evert and L.G. Nico, Rodda Caribbean Science Center. U.S. , Geological
Survey: 7920 NW 71st St; Gainesville, FL 32653,. USA.
Avon Park Air Force Range is a federal military reservation occupying 42,900 hectares in Fonda’s G^^^ter
Everglades Region. Prior to this study, the area was one of the more pooriy ^mpled sites for fishesi in all “ajjal
Florida In addition to bomb craters, aquatic habitats include the Kissimmee River canal and associated rernnant
meander channels. Lake Arbuckle (1550 ha), several small lakes; blackwater streams; extensive marshes,
hardwood cvoress and pine swamps; cattle ponds; and ditches. As part of an aquatic faunal survey (1995-1997),
wVdocum’enfad presence of 44 fish species (representing 17 fish families), eight         and one nonindi^nous
riam and two native crayfishes Introduced foreign species captured in the area included walking catfish (C/anas
Sch"s)“t!!^i^; (^re“hromfe aureus), grass carp (Cfenophaomgodon We/fa) and Asm clam Corbicu a
fluminea Two natives eastern mosquitofish (Gambus/a holbrooH) and least killifish (Heterandna formosa}, were
byTar the most abundant and widespread fishes. Compared with much of Florida artmp^falTn’a^few^arels T
to moderate (e.q., cattle throughout, water diversion in some sections, penodic artillery fire in a few areas ).
Relative to many environments in peninsular Rorida, numbers and densities of nonindigenous fishes in the rang
are low.




                                 13:00 Sunday                                                                     OVC
   290 .
Estimates of daily ration and a bioenergetic model for the blackiiose shark, Carcharhlnus acronr^.
CaifOTn, National Marine Fisheries Service, 3500 Delwood Beach Road P^ama City, FL 32408, USA, G.R.
Parsons, Biology Department, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA.
nailv ration estimates and bioenerqetic models for blacknose sharks, Carcharhirtus acronotus, were developed from
            eXrimX on rlietab^sm and growth at 28±2.0'>C. Size-specific rnetabolir: rates were determmed
closed-svstem respirometry and growth estimated through sharks held in captivity. Daily ration 'was estirnated for
sharte 05 OaT^ I 5           and 3.5 kg using the equation of Winberg (1956). Da y ration (%body weighVday
deCTMsed with b^y size and was estimated as 1.56 for smallest sharks and 0.87        largest sharks based on a die
of menhaden Brevoortia spp. General energy budgets were constructed for each size class. No estirnation of
reproductive investment was made because all individuals were determined to be immature. Routine JJ'etabolism
generally accounted for the largest percentage of the energy budget but^^ffered among e cfass
^creased with body size from 60% of the energy budget in small sharks (0.5-0.8 kg) to 71 /o for the largest s^rKs.
In contrast growth of somatic tissue was highest in small sharks (mean=9.9%) but was 1.5 A for the larger sharks.




                                                                                17                                .OVC
    291                           13:15 Sunday
  Modulation of the feeding behavior of the horn shark H^rodontus                                             P
 Department of Biology, University of South Ronda, 4202 East Fowler Ave., Tampa, Ronda 33620 USA.
 Manv fishes are caoable of modulating prey capture behavior according to prey size or elusiyity. The physical
 attributes of the orev appear to affect attack behavior, but factors such as position or location of prey may also Ibe
 imoortent This study tests the hypothesis that capture behavior can be modulated according to prey ^cessibility,
 uT^Phigtvspeed%deo WnS analysis, pre? capture, events are exarnined for tee horn.shade .Hetero^ntus
 francisd Each individual encounters three feeding situations: (1) squid pi^es resting freely ort a plattora, (2)
 attached to a platform; and (3) fitted snugly in a tube. Using suction behavior, H. franc/sci successMy captei^es prey
 in each feediiig situation with a common series of kinematic events. However, repeated bites            pa atod^adrate
 orotnjsion occur during attached feedings, and the labial cartilages extend to form a seal around tee tube openiiig
 during tube feedings. Average bite duration for three individuals is approxirnafely 124 ms, ®hhough signific^t inter-
 indivi^ual variation is observed Preliminary analyses show that H. francisa is capable of modulating the duration of
         "                 ^Xring capture, such as mandible elevation and palatoquadrate protrusion/retraction.
 according to the accessibility of the prey.




     29b                                  Sunday                                 !4                                THN
  Historical InfluencM on receiver biases: Artificial neural network models of call recognition in ths tungara
  frog, Phyaalaemua puatulosus. S.M. Phelps. Department of Zoology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
  78712 USA.
  Studies employing historical methods have shown that .preexisting biases in the sensory systems of females are
  capable of driving the evolution of male traits. I used artificial neural network models ~ computer simulations
  emulating real nervous systems - to test whether receiver biases could be directly influenced by tee evolutionary
  history of tee female sensory apparatus. Neural networks were given an evolutionary histo^ approximating that of
  the tungara frog^oruone of various control histories. I found that not only does evolutionary history influence receiver
  biases, but that networks with a history approximating that of tee tungara frog were best at predicting female
  responses to many novel heterospecific calls. The neural networks demonstrate patterns of preference that are
  clearly vestiges of past selection pressures, and make novel predictions about the preferences of real females.

  292 .                        13:30 Sunday                                    17                                ovc
The effects of scale on the feeding kinematics of the nurse shark, Ginglymo^oma cirratum.                M.P.
and P J Motta, Department of Biology, University of South, Florida. LIF 136, 4202 E. Fowler Ave, Tampa FL 33620
USA.
Successful inertial suction feeding depends, in part, on the speed of the feeding sequence. One
important to the speed of this behavior is the size of the animal. The effects of scale on the muscular dynamicsi d
aquatic vertebrates are still uncertain. We present data on the scaling of the prey capture kinematics of the nurse
shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, an inertial suction feeder. Morphometries of the head andI feedingi apparatus were
analyzed in twelve specimens ranging from 71 to 244 cm TL. These data indicated isometnc growth of the feed ng
apparatus. The kinematics of prey capture in another twelve specimens (33 to 268 cm) were                        9^
speed video and subsequently analyzed. The maximal excursions of angular vanables reniained constant through
ontogeny, while the maxima of the linear excursions increased. The time required to reach the
of the kinematic variables also increased with increasing animal size. The.slop^ oiThe,log-trapsformedwere
not significantly different from 0.333, thus these data are consistent with a model of muscular scaling inibal y
proposed for largemouth bass by Richard and Wainwright (1995). This pattern of scaling does not appear to apply to
 sharks in general.




                                13:45 Sunday                                   .17                               OVC
   293 .
Food habits of the smooth dogfish (Mustelus canis}, dusky shark {Carcharhinus obscurus}, Atlantic
sharpnose shark {Rhizoprionodon terranovae}, and the sand h^r (C^cbanas ^teorus) from^^the noi^w^t
Atlaritic Ocean. J.A. Musick and J. Gelsleichter, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, School of Manne Science, The
College of William and Mary in Virginia, Gloucester Pt.. VA 23062.
Diet and feeding habits of the smooth dogfish (Mustelus canis}, Atlantic sharpnose shark (^Koprfanodon
teranovae), dusky shark (Carcharhinus obscurus} and the sand tiger (Carchanas taurus} were
analysis of stomach contents. Diet in M. canis was relatively homogeneous and was dominated by cru^aceans.
ronsfating mostly of rock crabs. Cancer irroratus. Diet in R. terranovae was more heterogeneous and consisted
largely of crustaceans and teleosts, in similar levels of prey importance. Use of cumulativeprey curves as a
measure of precision indicated that data was insufficient to fully desenbe the diets of C. °bscurus and C. ^arus.
Nonetheless, these data suggested that both species are generalized feeders and consume a vanety of teleost and
elasmobranch prey. Further studies are necessary to fully charactenze diet in these two species. In addition, more
data are necessary to examine ontogenetic, seasonal and substrate-related shifts in diet for all of the species
investigated.




                                 13:30 Sunday                                   .14                               THN
    294
 Kin recognition, sexual selection, and mate choice in toads. B. Waldman, Department of Zoology. University of
 Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
 Long-term field studies of sexual selection in the explosively breeding American toad, Bufo ame^ani^, revea\ onty
 weak evidence of non-random mating based on size. Although advantages may accrue to fernales teat ^br^d wte
 larger males, levels of male-male competition and opportunities for fernale choice                           9? H?*?
 philopatry predict that close inbreeding should be common. Genetic analyses suggest to tee contrary teat. (1) in
 natural populations toads largely avoid close inbreeding, and (2) males' advertisement calls ®nc^e informatran
 about their genetic identities. To examine whether females can assess their relatedness to males by h®anng^^ttteir
 calls I conducted laboratory playback experiments. The responses of female subjects to males calls, broadca^
 alternately were analysed as a function of their relatedness to each of the males (determined by nwltil^us DNA
 finaerorintino) Females discriminated between calls based on kinship, consistently oneriting towai^ calls of the
 oenetxiallv less similar male. Responses were similar to field-recorded calls and to synthesised calls (controlling for
 call duration and number of pulses). Females showed no preference if equally related to each filing male. Jtrese
 results suggest teal mate choice is more strongly influenced by selection to avoid close inbreeding than by se
 selection for other characters.




    298                          14:00 Sunday                                  CE10                                OVC
 Corneal pathology associated with the attachment of OmmatokoHa elongata (Copepoda: Lernaepodidae)
 (Grant) to the cornea of Greenland sharks (Somnlosua microcephalus}. J.D. Boiucinska. Dept of Biology,
 University of Hartford. West Hartford, CT USA; H.E. Whiteley, Dept of Pathobiology, University of Connecticut,
 Storrs, CT USA; J. Tretfel Jr, Dept of Biology. University of Hartford, West Hartford, CT USA; G.W. Benz, Southeast
 Aquatic Research Institute and Tennessee Aquarium, Chattanooga, TN USA.
 Eyes from six Greenland sharks, Somniosus microcephalus, infected with the parasitic copepod Ommatokoita
 elongata were collected Arctic waters of Victor Bay, Northwest Territories, for study. Transformed adult female
 copepods, one per eye, were firmly attached to tee corneas by an anchoring structure (the bulla), and each bulla was
 associated with an opaque area on the cornea. In addition to opacities associated with copepods at the t'me of
 collection, there were several randomly distributed, small, round to irregular, full-thickness corneal opacities which
 were not associated with copepods. The sclera at the limbus of infected eyes was thickened at the radius
 corresponding to the feeding range of the copepod. Histologically, corneal epithelial ulceration and heterophilic
 keratitis, disruption, mineralization, and detachment of Bowman's membrane, thinning, disorganization,
 mineralization,
 _■____ a          a_ *_fibrosis
                  and            of tee _comeal
                           _a _______           substantia
                                          ____ a__ __ a__»a»_ propria,a*and focalathinning
                                                                        _ _____               Descemenfs
                                                                                           of __
                                                                                   ______ »•_               membrane
                                                                                                 ___ ««a-_________ •«»_were
                                                                                                                       ___important This study tests the hypothesis that capture behavior can be modulated according to prey accessibility.
Using a high-speed video kinematic analysis, prey capture events are examined for the horn shark, Heterodonijs
francisd. Each individual encounters three feeding situations: (1) squid pieces resting freely on a platform; (2)
attached to a platform; and (3) fitted snugly in a tube. Using suction behavior, H. francisd successfully captures prey
in each feeding situation with a common series of Wnematio events. However, repeated bites with palatoquadrate
protrusion occur during attached feedings, and the labial cartilages extend to form a seal around the tube opening
during tube feedings. Average bite duration for three individuals is approximately 124 ms, although significant infer-
individual variation is observed. Preliminary analyses show that H. francisd is capable of modulating the duration of
some kinematic events during capture, such as mandible elevation and palatoquadrate protrusion/retraction,
according to the accessibility of the prey.




Histoiicar influence* on receiver biases: Artificial neural network models of call recognition In the tungara
frog, Physalamtua pustulosua. S.M. Phelps. Department of Zoology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712 USA.

Studies employing historical methods have shown that preexisting biases in the sensory systems of females are
capable of driving the evolufion of male traits. I used artificial neural network models - computer simulations
emulating real nen/ous systems - to test whether receiver biases could be directly influenced by the evolutionary
history of the female sensory apparatus. Neural networks were given an evolutionary history approximating that of
the tungara frog, or one of various control histories. I found that not only does evolutionary history infiuence receiver
biases, but that networks with a history approximating that of ths tungara frog were best at predicting female
responses to many novel heterospecific calls. The neural networks demonstrate patterns of preference that are
clearly vestiges of past selection pressures, and make novel predictions about the preferences of real females.




   296                          15:15 Sunday                                    14                               THN
The influence of evolutionary history on signal recognition In tungara frMS.                 MJ. Rvan. Department of
Zoology, University of Texas, Austin TX 78712 USA; A.S. Rand, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, 900
Jefferson Drive, Suite 2207, Washington DC 20560.
We have been using the advertisement call system of tungara frogs {Physalaemus pustuiosus) and their close
relatives to attempt to understand the evolution of communication systems. We have analyzed the advertisement
calls and phylogenetic relationships of members of the Physaiaemus pustuiosus species group and three other
congeners as outgroups. Using these data we have estimated calls at ancestral nodes and tested tOngara frog
female preferences for these calls. Here we address the follovring questions: (1) How conservative is the evolution
of various call characters; (2) How do individual call rriiaracters infiuence advertisement call recognition
(heterospecific call versus white noise) and discrimination (heterospecific call versus conspecific call); and, (3) Does
the degree of plesiomorphy of a call character differentially influence call recognition and discrimination. Our results
suggest that: (1) calls do not evolve as tightly coordinated suites of characters, but instead are arrays of more or less
plesiomorphic or derived characters; (2) that call discrimination and recognition might be influenced differently by
some call characters than others; and, (3) that the degree of plesiomorphy of a call character might have some effect
on these tasks.




   297            .   ..        16:00 Sunday                                   14                               THN
Visual signaling In anuran amphibians. W. Hddl. Institute of Zoology, Univ, of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, A-1090
Wien, Austria; A. Amezquita, Department of Biosoiences, Univ, of the Andes, A.A. 4976, Bogota, Colombia.
Visual displays are known In both intra- and intersexual anuran communication. We compare the patterns of visual
signaling among seven anuran families and discuss the ecological contexts in which they may have evolved. We
classified visual cues used during intraspecific interactions as discrete character states and mapped them onto a
phylogenetic tree based on morphological characters. Groups of behavioural patterns are apparent and closely but
not exclusively associated with anuran families. By adding ecological characteristics and geographic distributions of
the involved sp^es to the matrix, the resulting patterns suggest visual displays to be more similar between species
of the same family. As striking exceptions, similar displays are performed by two across- family groups of species.
Diurnal, neotropical leaf-litter inhabitants and mainly aposematic species in the Brachycephalidae, Bufonidae and
Dendrobatidae exhibit an Impressive variety of visual displays involving predominantly anterior parts of the body.
Stream-side breeding, cryptic species in the Leptodactylidae, Myobatrachidae, Hylidae and Ranidae constitute
another probably converaent group, which includes both nocturnal and diurnal species exposed to constant high
ambient noise levels, "nriey perform conspicuous visual displays by extending or ‘flagging' the posterior limbs.
However, Hyta parviceps and Phyltomedusa spp., which advertise and breed at ponds, perform similar displays. The
observed patterns suggest that complex visual communication may have evolved under two ecological scenarios.
One is associated with the shift to diurnality and the other with breeding at tropical mountain streams. (Foot­
flagging displays of Hyiodes asper and Staurois latopatmatus are' shown in film and video scenes) 5

larger males, levels of male-male competition and opportunities for female choice vary. High levels of natal
philopatry predict that close inbreeding should be common. Genetic analyses suggest to the contrary that: (1) in
natural populations toads largely avoid close inbreeding, and (2) males' advertisement calls encode information
about their genetic identities. To examine whether females can assess their relatedness to males by hearing their
calls, I conducted laboratory playback experiments. The responses of female subjects to males' calls, broadcast
alternately, were analysed as a function of their relatedness to each of the males (determined by multilocus DNA
fingerprinting). Females discriminated between calls based on kinship, consistently orienting toward calls of the
genetically less similar male. Responses were similar to field-recorded calls and to synthesised calls (controlling for
call duration and number of pulses). Females showed no preference if equally related to each calling male. These
results suggest that mate choice is more strongly influenced by selection to avoid close inbreeding than by sexual
selection for other characters.




Comeal pathology associated with the attachment of Ommatokoita alangata (Copepoda: Lernaepodidae)
(Grant) to the cornea of Greenland sharks {Somnloaus mleracaphalu^. J.D. Borudnska- Dept of Biology,
University of Hartford, West Hartford, CT USA; H.E. Whiteley, Dept of Patfiobiology, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT USA; J. Trettel Jr, Dept of Biology, University of Hartford, West Hartford, CT USA; G.W. Benz, Southeast
Aquatic Research Institute and Tennessee Aquarium, Chattanooga, TN USA.

Eyes from six Greenland sharks, Somniosus microcephalus, infected with the parasitic copepod Ommatokoita
elongata were collected Arctic waters of Victor Bay, Northwest Territories, for study. Transformed adult female
copepods, one per eye, were firmly attached to the corneas by an anchoring structure (the bulla), and each bulla was
associated with an opaque area on the cornea. In addition to opacities associated with copepods at the time of
collection, there were several randomly distributed, small, round to irregular, full-thickness corneal opacities which
were not associated with copepods. The sclera at the limbus of infected eyes was thickened at the radius
corresponding to the feeding range of the copepod. Histologically, corneal epithelial ulceration and heterophilio
keratitis, disruption, mineralization, and detachment of Bowman's membrane, thinning, disorganization,
mineralization, and fibrosis of the comeal substantia propria, and focal thinning of Descemenrs membrane were
observed. Mild heterophilio and mononuclear scleritis at the limbus that was continuous with anterior uveitis was
also present. We conclude that parasitism by O. elongata could lead to severe visual impaimnent in Greenland
sharks. However, our current research is directed at understanding the physiology of the normal and altered visual
apparatus in this sperries. We are examining retinal enzymes and analyzing the photopigment prosthetic group.




   299                             14:15 Sunday      . .   .                   CE10                                OVC
The identity of the spotted eagle ray, Aetobatus narinarl - a parasitological perspective. K. Jensen and J.N.
Caira, Department, of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of, Connecticut, Storrs, CT USA.
Spiral intestines of rays identified as Aetobatus narinari, from the Gulf of California, the Gulf of Thailand and the
Timor Sea were examined for tapeworms. Light and electron microscopy of these worms revealed faunal differences
among individuals from these localities. Rays from Mdxico hosted several different species in the order
Tetr^hyllidea. Rays from Thailand and Australia hosted species belonging to file order Lecanicephalidea, but, the
species of lecanicephalideans differed between the two localities. Although these differences may simply reflect
differences in intermediate host availability, it is possible that these data are Indicative of differences in the specific
identities of the rays. Host morphology seems to support the latter explanation. Although rays from all three Irxalities
exhibited dark dorsal surfaces with white spots, size and distribution of these spots differed substantially. Additional
differences were seen in the angle of the anterior margin of the pectoral fins and in snout length. Combined these
data lead us to suspect that the of spotted eagle ray found in the Eastern Pacific might not be conspecific with those
found in the two localities In the Indian Ocean. In addition, based on our data, the conspecific identity of the spotted
eagle rays from Thailand and Australia is questionable.




    300.       ,     .    ..   .   14:30 Sunday                                CE10                               OVC
Identifying cryptic carcharhinifonn shark species: tapeworms as diagnostic tools. C.J. Healy and J.N. Caira,
Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of, Connecticut, Storrs, CT USA.
Tetr^hyllidean tapeworms are restricted to elasmobranch hosts and can be highly host specific; in fact, some
species parasitize single species of elasmobranchs and thus may assist in identifying elasmobranch species. Spiral
intestines of Prionace giauca, Galeocerdo cuvier, Eusphyra biochii, 4 Sphyma species, 2 Negaprion species, 3
Rhizoprionodon species, and 19 Carcharbinus species from locations including the western North Atlantic Ocean,
Gulf of California, and Timor Sea off of northern Australia were examined for tetraphyllideans in the temily
Onchobothriidae. Species of the genera Dicranobothrium, Phoreiobothrium, and Ptatybothrium were found to be
restricted iri distribution to carcharhiniform sharks and were found in most of the species examined. Many of the
onchobothriids found are new to sdence and currently undescribed. Our results suggest that the host species
exarriined are parasitized by at least 1 strictly host specific onchobothriid species. In some cases, more than 1 host
specific onchobothriid species was found in a single host species. For example, Negaprion acutidens hosted 3 new
species of Phoreiobothrium that were not found in the other 30 species of carcharhiniform sharks examined. These
results suggest that each carcharhiniform species may possess a unique parasite fauna that could be used as a
diagnostic tool for species identificafion.E



       301                         14:45 Sunday                                  CE1O                                 OVC
    Buoyancy in deep-sea sharks from the Chatham Rise. New Zealand. B.M. Wetherfaee. Zoology Department,
    University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA.
    Although deep-sea sharks approach neutral buoyancy through a large oily liver that contains low-density lipids such
    as squalene, there have been few comparisons of buoyancy within and among species of sharks. Buoyancy and
    chemical composition of the liver oil of sharks collected in deep-water trawls from the Chatham Rise, New Zealand
    were compared. Although there appears to be strong selection for neutral buoyancy in these sharks, buoyancy
    characteristics of sharks varied with species, size, sex and reproductive state. Livers of smaller sharks contain more
    squalene and are less dense than livers of larger sharks. However, livers of larger sharks contain a greater
    proportion of oil than livers of smaller sharks, and the whole body of sharks is nearly uniformly neutrally buoyant
    regardless of size of shark. Livers of mature male sharks contain more squalene and are less dense than those of
    mature females, but the non-liver tissue in females is less dense than that of males, and the whole bodies of both
    sexes are equally neutrally buoyant. Regulation of buoyancy of species of sharks found in shallow water differs
    considerably from that of deeper species, and appears to rely more on hydrodynamic lift provided by lifting surfaces
    such as fins.




       302                          15:30 Sunday       . ,                        CE10                               OVC
    Kinematics of shark pectoral fin movements and their implications for lift-production.                    M.P. Robinson,
    Department of Biology, University of South Florida, LIF 136,, 4202 E. Fowler Ave, Tampa FL 33620 USA.
    Elasmobranchs, negatively buoyant animals, must produce dynamic lift to avoid sinking. Current models of shark
    locomotion assume that lift is produced posteriorly by the heterocercal caudal fin and anteriorly by the pertoral firis
    and head. These two components of lift produce torques at the center of mass that negate one another. All inodels
    have assumed that the pectoral fins are static during swimming. Using a dual video camera system I r^orded spiny
    dogfish, Squalus acan&iias, swimming in a large flume. Marks placed on the fins divided them into separate
    segments. Three-dimensional kinematic analyses of these individual segments of the fins and head of the shark
    demonstrated manipulation of the pectoral fins by the sharks during swimming. The angle of the pectoral firi was
    modified during steady swimming and was correlated with the position of the caudal fin during its beat. An index of
    lift was calculated for each fraction of the pectoral fin and head. The head appears to produce significantly more lift
    during steady swimming and while the animal is ascending In the water column. The negative lift produced by the
    pectoral fins appears to be Important in angling the animal down when It begins a descent




       303                         , 15:45 Sunday                                CE10                                 OVC
    Preliminary analysis of factors Influencing swimming speed of the subadult lemon shark [Negaprion
    brevirostris) at BiminlLagoon, Bahamas. J.C. Sterk. Bimini Biological Reid Station, Bimini, Bahamas; S.H.
    Gniber, Bimini Biological Field Station, Bimini, Bahamas, University of Miami RSMAS, 4600 Rickenbacker
    Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA.
    Influence of time of day, location of shark and tracker experience on swimming speed was examined in seven
    subadult lemon sharks using speed sensing transmitters. Of nine sharks caught using long line gear between
    January 1997 and August 1997, seven, ranging in size from 160 cm to 183 cm, were fitted with a combination of two
    telemetry transmitters. The devices, a 75 kHz coded transmitter for identification and a 68 kHz transmitter for sp^d
    sensing were mated with cable ties and fixed to the shark with metal darts at the base of the first dorsal fin.
    seven sharks were tracked for a total of 450 hours with at least one continuous, 24 hour track for each shark. The
    longest continuous track was 88 hours. Using GIS and standard statistical methods a first analysis of swimming
    speeds did not revei any significant differences according to time of day. Daytime and nighttime swimming speeds
    averaged 0.33 body lengths per second (bl/s), while crepuscular speeds averaged 0.32 bl/s. In addition, burst-speed
    events did not appear to show any correlation with time of day. GIS analysis of swimming speed and shark location
    showed average speeds to be slightly slower in areas adjacent to mangroves. Swimming speeds were noted to
    decline steadily from 0.45 bl/s with the first 4 sharks tracked to a steady 0.32-0.33 bl/s for the final three sharks. Inis
    suaaested that tracker experience can significantly Influence the speed of a shark. Detail^ analysis of^e tracking
    continues. The bioenergetic significance of these trackings will be discussed. Supported by the US Office of Naval
    Research, the Bimini Biological Field Station and tire Earthwatch organization




        307                          13'00 Sliitday                               CAI                                 CHM
     Consequences of pesticide accumulation in anuran populations. R.W. Russell. Great Lakes Lab for Fisheries
     and Aquatic Sciences, Dept, of Fisheries and Oceans, 867 Lakeshore Rd., Burlington, ON, L7R 4A6: S.J. Heonar
     Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1; G. Mouland, Point Pelee National Park, RR#1,
     Leamington, ON, N8H 3V4; G.D. Haffner, Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Science, University of Windsor,
     401 Sunset Ave., Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4. •

    Environmental contamination with anthropogenic chemicals has been implicated in the decline and disappearance of
    amphibians from many localities around the world. Point Pelee National Park in southern Ontario has lost 5 of 10
    amphibian species in the last 50 years. Habitat loss has occurred but cannot account for the number of amphibian
    extirpations documented in the park. Similar aniphibian losses have not occurred at nearby wetlands. Amphibian
    extirpations at Point Pelee follow a period of DDT application in orchards. DDT and metabolite concentrations were
    greatest in terrestrial arpphibians (Pseudacris crucifer and Bufo americanus} and least in aquatic amphibians (Rana
    clamilans and Rana pipiens). High pesticide concentrations were measured in reptilian predators of amphibians,
    however pesticide concentrations measured in predatory fish were much lower than in snakes of similar trophic
    position. Trophic magnification of pesticides was observed only in the terrestrial food web. Pesticide accumulation in
    amphibians was positively related to site contamination. These data collected in southern Ontario indicate that the
    historic use of pesticides may be an important determinant of local distribution of amphibians and their predators.

   304                   .    . 16:00 Sunday                                CE10                                 OVC
Odontologicat variations in the dentition of the manta ray (Manta blrostris). J.A. Bourdon. 33 Nordica Drive,
Croton-on-Hudson, NY 10520 USA.
The study of Neogene batoids requires an understanding of extant species. An in-depth understanding of the
ondontological characteristics of the living fish is needed because fossil material is largely limited to teeth and
dermal denticles. Although cursory descriptions of dentitions are often provided, these descriptions usually lack the
detail required for paleontological purposes. I initiated a study of a Manta birostris dentition in an effort to identify
manta-like teeth from the Miocene of North Carolina. These teeth, which are commonly referred to as "simple peg­
like", were more variable then anticipated and clearly reflect their mobulid origin.




   305          . . .           16:15 Sunday             .        ..        CE10                 ..      .       OVC
 Tooth replacement rate of the great white shark, Carcharodon carcharias (Linnaeus, 1758). J.C. Bruner,
Laboratory for Vertebrate Paleontology, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
T6G 2E9.
 Analysis of 31 jaws of Carcharodon cardrarias, from specimens ranging in total length from 143.5 to 460.9 cm, finds
a range in tooth replacement rate of the Second Lateral tooth family of (Upper Jaw/Lower Jaw) 106.24/113.59 days
for young individuals to 225.90/242.18 days for old Individuals using the Strasburg Plot Method. The Second Lateral
tooth family of the upper and lower jaws gives the best estimates of tooth replacement rate. Upper and lower jaws
demonstrate fluctuating asymmetry within the number of tooth positions. The range in dental formulae of the
upper/lower jaw for this sample is: 11 to 15 - 0 -12 to 14 /11 to 16 - 0 -11 to 15. One male (NOAA-NMFS Tag #610,
TL 149.5 cm) taken off New Jersey in the Northwest Atlantic, has a very minute parasymphysial tooth in the upper
right jaw. This is the first report of a parasymphysial tooth present in a White Shark and is considered here as an
atavistic character. Using the tooth replacement rate of 106.24 days/toofh, and previous reports of near term White
Shark embryos with 3 to 4 full tooth sets present in their alimentary canals, an estimate of when tooth replacement
begins prior to parturition and therefore a minimum estimate of gestation period for the White Shark can be
calmlated as 425 days.




   306                           16:30 Sunday                ..        .      CE10          ..    .               OVC
Trabecular prismatic cartilage: a novel solution to strengthening the jaws of a cartilaginous fish.                  A.P^
Summers. Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Amherst. MA 01003 USA.
A synapomorphy of the cartilaginous fishes (Chondriohthyes) is that some, or all, of the skeleton is composed of
calcified cartilage known as prismatic cartilage. The surface of prismatic cartilage is a mosaic of plates of calcium
apatite crystals called tesserae. These tesserae surround a core of hyaline cartilage much as the rind surrounds the
pulpy fruit of an orange and serve to stiffen the skeletal element. In both jaw cartilage of the cownose ray, Rhinoptera
bonasus, struts of calcification run through the hyaline cartilage core. Cownose rays feed on mollusks, ophiuroids
and other hard prey. Tooth plates of adults show distinct wear patterns where the prey is usually cnjshed. A sagittal
section through this 'trabecular cartilage' shows that the starts are positioned so as to prevent buckling in this area.
The common ancestor of cartilaginous and bony fishes is thought to have had a bony endoskeleton. The lamellar
bone of the tesserae and vertebrae of chondrichthians is evidence that the skeleton has not lost osteogenic potential
entirely. The data presented here indicate that a novel developmental and biochemical process is also at work in the
cartilage. Data from neonate individuals indicates that the process of trabeculation is not epigenetic, but rather is part
of a fixed developmental pattern. Bone is typically strengthened through endosteal deposition and trabeculation. In a
remarkable example of convergence, multiple layers of tesserae and stmt formation serve the same purpose in
cartilage.




    310 ,         .              13:45 Sunday                                 CAI                                chm
A study of the herpetofaunal assemblages In the floodplain habitats of the Kissimmee River. C.J. Farrell and
MA. Donnelly, Rorida International University, Arts and Sciences/Biological Sciences, North Miami, FL 33181 USA.

This study examined herpetofaunal assemblage structure in three floodplain habitats (broadleaf marsh, wetland
forest, and wetland shrub) of the Kissimmee River. The Kissimmee River is the subject of a large-scale restoration
project and its success will be evaluated by analyzing changes in the associated biotic assemblages. This study
provides the baseline data necessary for evaluating the effects of restoration based on changes in herpetofaunal
assemblages. Data were collected for 12 consecutive months from August 1996, to July, 1997, using nocturnal
visual encounter sunreys. Results will be presented describing species occurrences and abundances, species­
habitat associations, and faunal similarity among sites.   303                           15:45 Sunday                                  CE10                               OVC
Preliminary analysis of factors influencing swimming speed of the subaduH lemon shark {Negaprion
brevJrostrfs) at BlmihlLagoon, Bahamas. J.C. Sterk. Bimini Biological Reid Station, Bimini, Bahamas; S.H.
Gruber, Bimini Biological Field Station, Bimini, Bahamas, University of Miami RSMAS, 4600 Rickenbacker
Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA.
Influence of time of day, location of shark and tracker experience on swimming speed was examined in seven
subadult lemon sharle using speed sensing transmitters. Of nine sharks caught using long line gear between
January 1997 and August 1997, seven, ranging in size from 160 cm to 183 cm, were fitted with a combination of two
telemetry transmitters. The devices, a 75 kHz coded transmitter for identification and a 68 kHz transmitter for speed
sensing were mated with cable ties and fixed to the shark with metal darts at the base of the first dorsal fin. The
seven sharks were tracked for a total of 450 hours wi^ at least one continuous, 24 hour track for each shark. The
longest continuous track was 88 hours. Using GIS and standard statistical methods a first analysis of swimming
speeds did not reveal any significant differences according to time of day. Daytime and nighttime swimming speeds
averaged 0.33 body lengnis per second (bl/s), while crepuscular speeds averaged 0.32 bIZs. In addition, burst-speed
events did not appear to show any correlation with time of day. GIS analysis of swimming speed and shark location
showed average speeds to be slightly slower in areas adjacent to mangroves. Swimming speeds were noted to
decline steadily from 0.45 bl/s with the first 4 sharks tracked to a steady 0.32-0.33 bl/s for the final three sharks. This
suggested that tracker experience can significantly influence the speed of a shark. • Detailed analysis of the tracking
continues. The bioenergefio significance of these trackings will be discussed. Supported by the US Office of Naval
Research, the Bimini Biological Field Station and the Earthwafch organization




   307                           13:00 Sunday. .                       ., ..   CAI                                CHM
Consequences of pesticide accumulation In anuran populations. R.W. Russell. Great Lakes Lab for Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences, Dept, of Fisheries and Oceans, 867 Lakeshore Rd., Burlington, ON, L7R 4A6; S.J. Hecnar,
Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1; G. Mouland, Point Pelee National Park, RR#1,
Leamington, ON, N8H 3V4; G.D. Haffner, Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Science, University of Windsor,
401 Sunset Ave., Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4. •
Environmental contamination with anthropogenic chemicals has been implicated in the decline and disappearance of
amphibians from many localities around the world. Point Pelee Nation^ Park in southern Ontario has lost 5 of 10
amphibian species in the last 50 years. Habitat loss has occurred but cannot account for the number of amphibian
exfirpations documented in the park. Similar amphibian losses have not occurred at nearby wetlands. Amphibian
extirpations at Point Pelee follow a period of DDT application in orchards. DDT and metabolite concentrations were
greatest in terrestrial amphibians (Pseudacris crucifer and Bufo americanus) and least in aquatic amphibians [Rana
clamitans and Rana pipiens). High pesticide concentrations were measured in reptilian predators of amphibians,
however pesticide concentrations measured in predatory fish were much lower than in snakes of similar trophic
posifion. Trophic magnification of pesticides was observed only in the terrestrial food web. Pesticide accumulation in
amphibians was positively related to site contamination. These data collected in southern Ontario indicate that the
historic use of pesticides may be an important determinant of local distribution of amphibians and their predators.




   308      .       .           13:15-Sunday                                   GAI                                CHM
A comparison of Inventory sampling methods for a neotropical herpetofaunal assemblage In Iwokrama
Reserve. M.H. Chen and M.A. Donnelly, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami,
FL 33199 USA.
This study will explore the efficiency of different inventory sampling methods for an assemblage of lowland tropical
amphibians and reptiles. The goal of this research is to identify which methods give the most accurate description of
a herpetofaunal assemblage. Data were collected from the Iwokrama International Centre for Rain Forest
Conservation and Development in central Guyana. Four different methods (day visual encounter survey, night visual
encounter survey, leaf litter plots, and opportunistic collecting) were used to examine the assemblage stnjcture.
Results will be presented examining the variation in descriptors of amphibian and reptile species diversity among
different populations and different methods. It is important for researchers to develop standard standard methods for
sampling assemblage structure. Inventory sampling provides information on assemblage structure and baseline
species diversity data for future comparisons. Therefore, these data are critical in the quest to discover the
relationship between species loss and ecosystem function.




   309                           13:30 Sunday                                  CAI                                CHM
Amphibian monitoring, varlablltty, and sample size: lessons from the literature. P.C. Eagle. Pennsylvania
State University, c/o Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, 12100 Beech Forest Road , Laurel, MD 20708-4038 USA;
S. Droege, Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, 12100 Beech Forest Road , Laurel, MD 20708-4038 USA; J.P.
Gibbs, Slate University of New York, Syracuse, NY 13210 USA.
Counts of amphibians over time were compiled from published accounts. At ths time this abstract was written, 37
studies have yielded 110 separate count series for 45 amphibian species. Counts were analyzed to determine
series mean, detrended standard deviation, and subsequent coefficient of variation (CV). Studies have been
categorized according to taxonomic group, sampling method, study region, and count type (index vs. population
estimate). Initial analyses indicate significant differences among count CVs based on count type, with CVs from
population estimates being significantiy lower than index CVs (p = 0.016). While sample sizes were low, there are
further indications that CVs of counts of terrestrial and stream salamanders are much lower than most anuran and
pond-breeding salamanders. We are currently adding counts to the database as new studies arise. We will also
demonstrate the impact of variability on power and sample size requirements for monitoring programs using the
program MONITOR. Finally, we plan to use studies providing within season data and multiple site data to
characterize the various components of count variance among sampling error and yearly variation.

   306                           16:30 Sunday                                 CE10        ..   .                 OV.C
Trabecular prismatic cartilage: a novel solution to strengthening the Jaws of a cartilaginous fish.                  A.P.
Summers. Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003 USA.
A synapomorphy of the cartilaginous fishes (Chondrichthyes) is that some, or all, of the skeleton is composed of
calcified cartilage known as pnsmatic cartilage. The surface of prismatic cartilage is a mosaic of plates of calcium
apatite crystals called tesserae. These tesserae surround a core of hyaline cartilage much as the rind surrounds the
pulpy fruit of an orange and serve to stiffen the skeletal element. In both jaw cartilage of the rxnvnose ray, Rhinoptera
bonasus, struts of calcification run through the hyaline cartilage core. Cownose rays feed on mollusks, ophiuroids
and other hard prey. Tooth plates of adults show distinct wear patterns where the prey is usually crushed. A sagittal
section through this 'trabecular cartilage' shows that the struts are positioned so as to prevent buckling in this area.
The common ancestor of cartilaginous and bony fishes is thought to have had a bony endoskeleton. The lamellar
bone of the tesserae and vertebrae of chondrichthians is evidence that the skeleton has not lost osteogenic potential
entirely. The data presented here indicate that a novel developmental and biochemical process is also at work in the
cartilage. Data from neonate individuals indicates that the process of trabeculation is not epigenetic, but rather is part
of a fixed developmental pattern. Bone is typically strengthened through endosteal deposition and trabeculation. In a
remarkable example of convergence, multiple layers of tesserae and strut formation senre the same purpose in
cartilage.




   310                           13:45 Sunday                                  CA1                                CHM
A study of the heipetofaunal assemblages In the floodplain habitats of the Kissimmee River. C J. Farrell and
MA. Donnelly, Florida International University, Arts and Sciences/Biological Sciences, North Miami, FL 33181 USA.
This study examined herpetofaunal assemblage structure in three floodplain habitats (broadleaf marsh, wetland
forest, and wetland shnjb) of the Kissimmee River. The Kissimmee River is the subject of a large-scale restoration
project and its success will be evaluated by analyzing changes in the associated biotic assemblages. This study
provides the baseline data necessary for evaluating the effects of restoration based on changes !n herpetofaunal
assemblages. Data were collected for 12 consecutive months from August, 1996, to July, 1997, using nocturnal
visual encounter surveys. Results will be presented describing species occurrences and abundances, species­
habitat associations, and faunal similarity among sites.




   311                           14:00 Sunday                                  CAI                               CHM
Automated acoustical monitoring of anuran amphibians In New Brunswick, Canada. K.L. Oseen. Department
of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax NS, B3H 4J1; R.J. Wassersug, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
Dalhousie University, Halifax NS, B3H 4H7.
As part of a long-term amphibian monitoring program, automated acoustical recorders were placed at five sites in
two national parks in New Bninswick during the summer of 1997. Each recorder took a one minute long acoustical
sample every hour from early May until the end of August, for an average of 110 recording days per recorder.
Analysis of acoustical samples revealed the presence of five anuran species, Pseudacris crucifer, Rana catesbeiana,
Rana clamitans, Rana syh/atica, and Bufo americanus. A sixth species, Rana pipiens, was detected on only one
occasion. Three species also found in New Brunswick (Hyla versicolor, Rana palustris, and Rana septentrionalis')
were not detected at any of ths sampled sites. Chorus activity patterns changed over the breeding season for each
species. In general, chorus activity was highest between the hours of 10 pm and 5 am, although calling individuals
were frequently recorded throughout the day. We also compared two acoustical sampling protocols (one min every
hour vs. 12 s every 15 min). Both strategies detected the same species richness, but showed subtle differences in
anuran activity patterns. Comparison of calling activity with meteorological data is currently underway.




  ■312                           14:15 Sunday                                  CAI                               CHM
Herpetofaunal populations of an urban lake/wetland ecosystem in central New York. P.K. Ducev. Department
of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Cortland, Cortland, NY, 13045 USA.
Onondaga Lake lies in the Syracuse NY urbanization zone surrounded by industrial, commercial, and residential
areas. The lake has been greatly impacted by a century of industrial waste dumping and sewage discharge. Since
1994, herpetofaunal sunreys have been conducted in the lake and adjacent terrestrial and wetland areas using
transecris, quadrats, trapping arrays, select point sampling, and calling surveys spanning all active seasons. The
Onondaga Lake ecosystem was found to support reduced herpetofaunal diversity and population sizes compared to
less disturbed areas in the region. No amphibians breed in the lake itself or in any wetland with direct connections to
the lake. Frve anuran and two salamander species utilize runoff-filled wetlands adjacent to the lake. Remediation
efforts in the ecosystem should include retention of isolated wetland as sources of animals for recolonization                               14:30 Sunday                                CAI                              CHM
  313
Effects of clearcutting on amphibian and reptile communities of temporary ponds in a managed pine
flatwoods. E.A. Domingue. USDI, US Geological Sunrey, BRD, 320 Laurel Valley Road, Townsend, TN 37882.

The heroetofaunal community of a slash pine flatwoods ecosystem of north-central Honda was monitored from
AugusfTggS through August 1994, October 1995 through September 1996, and November 1996
Drift fences with ninnel traps and PVC pipe refugia were used to gather baseline data on the herpetofaunal
community using nine temporary ponds and the adjacent uplands, before and after a timber harvest study ponds
rannnd in sizo frZ o Ol - 0.71 ha. Forty-five species (16 amphibian, 29 reptile)were recorded. Effects of
clearcutting and site preparation included significant short-term changes in both amphibian and mptile
abundance. As compared with the control, amphibian numbers were higher on ‘ti®                             th^^first
siimmprs Dost-harvest (P < 0 001 P = 0.0137, respectively). Reptile numbers were higher on the clearcut in the first
SS Jnh?(pTaa)'n.^’ye« fhree (1997) fo°amphibians and year two (1996) for reptiles, relative abundance
on the clearcut site returned to numbers comparable to those, observed on ^®                            27 SD^-
amohibians and reptiles was documented with distances ranging from 16 - 692 m (Mean - 98.1, n - 47, bu-
145.9y Thus some amphibians and reptiles are using large areas of the flatwoods, including upland habitat and one
or more ponds.




                               14:45 Sunday                                CAI                               CHM
   314
Effects of selection logging on the relative abundance of breeding arnphibtoiis within tolerarit hardwood
forests of Ontario. L. Enright. Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontano, N1G 2W1.

Many of Ontario's amphibian species occur in forested areas of the Great Lakes-Sf.
soecies are potentially suscepme to habitat disturbance and alteration associated with selection loggmg proto^js
used to XaaroSv-Sd, tolerant hardwood forests in these areas. In 1995, I began a research program to
determine whether and if so, by what mechanism(s), selection logging affects ^phibian diversity and
abundance at breedinq sites. Iri 1996 and 1997, I compared amphibian abundance concurrently with habitat
characteristics of’ (a) 10 ephemeral breeding pools adjacent to logging roads, (b) 10 ephemeral breeding pools
within forest stands' logged 2-3 years prior to being surveyed, and (c) 10 ephemeral br^ding pools in forest st^ds
that had been left undi^urbed for at least 30-40 years. Results of nocturnal, time constrained surveys of breeding
adult abundance at these pools suggest that selection logging does not affect the abundance of breeding adults as a
group However, when I analyzed data for each species seperately, I found that although selection fogging does not
aooear to affect the relative abundance of Spring Peepers, Wood Frogs appear to be more abundant in undistutoed
forestoth^ in logged forests during the early part of the breeding season. The rel®«ve abundance of Ame^an
Toads was consistently higher in breeding pools within logged f®’’®®*.
Stepwise multiple regression analysis suggests that venation in amphibian abundance can be explained best by
variation in the duration of these ephemeral pools.




                                15:30 Sunday                                CAI                              CHM
    315
 How important Is statistical power when testing hypotheses of amphibian decline? J.C. MacDonald.
 Brooks Department of Zctology, University of Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1; L.J. ®*^'f®®®'
 Canadian tWidlife Service, Box 5050 Burlington, Ontario L7R 4N0; K.A. Judge, Department of Zoology, University of
 Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.
 The jargon of statistical power has invaded the vocabulary of almost every conservation biologist rJespite being
 largely^absent from the literature as applied methodology. With 7®P®®‘*° ®PP^'‘’'?"            ™henThe^^^^
 refers to the probability of correctly rejecting the null hypothesis (that there is no decline) when the aternawe
 hypothesis is true (a decline is occurring). Clearly we want high power in our monitonng programs ®° ®®J®      “
 the chance of maWnq a Type II error fe., failing to detect a decline that is occurririg). However, .^®®y
 monitoring programs^ likely do not have the necessary power to satisfactonly reduce foe possibihty that ^toal
 declines are occurring even though some studies suggest stability and have data-sets that exceed 10 years. Her^
 wVreSew the concepts of statistical power as they apply to detecting populatiOT declines. We then raloiflate an
 estimate of power for fong-term data on bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana] and wood frogs 0^®"®                kn hnw an
 the problems associated with maximizing power in amphibian monitonng                  J^® „ ®°g
 understanding of power should influence both the design of monitonng programs and management expectations.




     319                  .      T3<15 Sunday__________________              GS1__________________            MCN
  fritraspecffic motecular systematics of the sabine shiner, Notri^is sablnae (Teieostei:          Cyprinldae).   ME.
 Bajfiy, Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede Avenue, St. Louis, MO 31303-2010 USA.
 Prior 10 1991, foe sabine shiner, Notropis sabinae, was known only from drainages west of the Mississippi River. In
 the process of describing the Yazoo shiner, N. rafinesquei, Suttkus noted the presence of N. sabinae within the
 Yazoo River, a system which lies east of the Mississippi River. Further sampling uncovered yet another eastern
 population within foe Big Black River system. Upon preliminary examination, the latter population appears Itf show
 morphological novelties for this group. Given the diversity exhibited among populations of N. sabinae, a genetic data
 set was assembled to aid in defining operational taxonomic units (OTUs, sensu Mayden and Wood, 1995) within this
 species, and to suggest avenues for further study. Sequences were collected from the mitochondrial cytochrome b
 gene from individuals representing the geographic range of this species and were subjected to phylogenetic and
 population-level analyses. In all analyses, the Big Black River population was strongly supported as monophyletic
 and distinct from any other population.

                                15:45 Sunday                                 CAI                               CHM
  316
Translocation of amphibians into mitigated and existing wetlands-a review of a new protocol. J.T. Julian and
J.H. Howard, Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg, MD 21532 USA.
Previous amphibian relocation, repatriation, and translocation programs have proven most success^ wheri
introducing individuals in early developmental stages. Over the next 2 years, we will introduce     masses of ta^et
amphibian species into artificial ponds in mitigated and existing wetland areas at       Gap State
Three pairs of constructed ponds (approximately 18.5 m®) are arranged so one shallow pond (< .4m in d^th) and
one deep pond (> .45m in depth) comprise each pair. The shallow ponds will facilitate establishment of s^l, less
abundant anuran species by excluding larger species with longer developrnent^ stages. To monitor migration all
ponds are encircled by drift fencing with both pitfall and funnel traps. Introduced egg masses will be monitored by
recording percent hatching success and larvae will be monitored by tracking tadpole ^oravorship via weeWy
population estimates using a quadrat box sampling technique. Metamorphosed individuals captured while disperang
from the ponds will be marked with toe-clipping to determine if they return to breed m subsequent seasons.
Additional marking schemes include freeze branding metamorphosed salamandere and photqidentification of
 anurans Additional constructed ponds in adjacent areas are being monitored for unaided colonization.




                                16:00 Sunday                                  CAI                               CHM
   ■317
Amphibians and reptiles of the Georgian Bay islands. D. Brittan, Office of the Secretary of State parte). Edifice
Jules Leger, 11th Floor, Hull, Que, KIA QMS; J.P. Bogart, Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, NIG 2W1.
Forming a large eastern embayment on Lake Huron, Georgian Bay comprises a b^y of water approximate y the
same size as the state of Vermont. Bounded in the west by the limestone arc of the Niagara esoarprnent, and in the
west by the Canadian Shield, the Bay encompasses some of Ontano s most spectacular                        ®®'^®’ '*,'®
also one of the province's richest areas for amphibians and reptiles, with 35 species f®®®^^®''’f®®*               J"
Georgian Bay Islands National Park, Beausoleil Island alone, at an area of 1100 ha, supports 32 ®’5^®®®JP®®"®®’
Among the resident herpetofauna are the regionally rare Spotted Turtle, Eastern Hcignose Snake, Eastern Fox
Snake and Eastern Massasauga. During the summers of 1995 and 1996, herpetofaunal surveys were conducted on
43 of the approximately 30,000 islands in Georgian Bay. This talk will provide an overview of the varied habitats and
herpetofauna of this region, as well as a discussion of the biogeographic points of interest.




    318                          13:00 Sunday                                 GS1                                MCN .
 Comparisons of assimilation efficiency and gut characteristics in two species of herbivorous datn^selfishes
 (Stegastes dorsopunicans and S. planitrons). A. Cleveland, Department of Biological Sciences Box 5640 NAU
 Hagstaff AZ, 86011 -5640 USA.
  As consumers of 60-99% of reef primary productivity, herbivorous fishes occupy a pivotal role in channeling energy
 alonTfoe reef food chain. I examined feeding physiology and ecology/ of two terntonal heibivorous damselfishes
 commonly found among the coral reefs of the San Blas Archipelago, Republic of Panama. I measured               i®.®9ib,
 out retention time, and total and nutrient-specific assimilation efficiencies and made interspeafio cornpansons
 between the dusky damselfish (S. dorspopunicans} and the threespot damselfish (S. planif^s}. Re atiw gut lerigth
 is significantly different between the two damselfish species. Dusky damselfish have a relative gut length ratio (gut
 tengtwSato Tengfo) d 1.20 and a Zihler indes ((gut length/(weightA1«) » f42. Values for fo^s threesp^^^
 damselfish are 3 01 and 824 respectively. Despite striking differences in RGL and Zl, the gut retenflqn time is the
 same for both species. Additionafly, only protein assimilation efficiency (and thus total ®®®"r"'®J®® ®^®'®?^\''^P®®
 between species; significantly more protein is assimilated by the threespot '*®™®'’®h 'ha®‘he dusky damselfish.
 The^e results have several important Implications. First, as both species feed on the same algal diet, the greater
 SsWiXn eScy o® foJ foreespot damselfish may translate into faster growth rates and pre^r reproducbve
 caoacitv Second It has long been held that relative gut length ratios of herbivorous fishes fell
      most herbivorous damselfishes in the range of 5. The significantly lower relative 9Ut leng^ of dus^ d^^lfis^

                                           questions the apptlcabWity of such characters in phylogenetic analyses.




    322                     ,    14:00' Sunday              _____________ GS1                                    MCN
 Are you considering transplantantion as a management tod? Be cautious - mixing gene pods may be more
 harmful than helpful due to outbreeding depression. J.P. Hernandez-Martich. The University of Georgia
 Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.
 Mixing gene pools may cause outbreeding depression (OD). However, it is unknown what kind and degree of
 between-mate dissimilarity should exist for OD to occur. The Optimum Outbreeding Paradigm (OOP) predicts
 inbreeding depression (ID) tor offspring of close relatives. As similarities between mates decrease, offspring fitness
 increases, reaches an optimal level and then decreases to levels below parental fitness (I. e., OD occurs).
 Populations of eastern mosquitofish {Gambusia holbrooki: Poeciliidae) from foe Piedmont and Coastal Plain of two
 drainages were used as sources of fish for seven crosses and six pure controls each replicated in four mesocosms.
 OD occurred in populations of some crosses between fish from different regions and/or drainages. There were
 significantly more extinct populations among those founded with fish from the same vs. different region/drainage
 sections (7of 20 vs. 3 of 32). Population size and growth rate, fecundity and juvenile survival were significantly lower
 for populations of crosses of fish from different regions and/or drainages than for those of their controls. I examined
 potential predictors of OD and the per-locus number of unshared alleles (Nu) between sources was the best
 predictor under the OOP. Optimum outcrossing and OD are expected when Nu = 0.25 and >0.45, respectively.nypotnesis is true Decline is occurnngj. vieany we wani nign power in our moniionng programs so as lo minimize
the chance of making a Type II error (i.e., failing to detect a decline that is occurring). However, many amphibian
monitoring programs likely do not have the necessary power to satisfactorily reduce the possibility that actual
declines are occurring, even though some studies suggest stability and have data-sets that exceed 10 years. Here,
we review the concepts of statistical power as they apply to detecting population declines. We then calculate an
estimate of power for long-term data on bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and wood frogs (Rana sylvatica] to investigate
the problems associated with maximizing power In amphibian monitoring programs. We also comment on how an
understanding of power should influence both the design of monitoring programs and management expectations.




   31                          13 :15 Sunday                              GS1 ..               . .  .  MCN
Intraspecific molecular systematics of the sabine shiner, Notropla sablnae fTeleostei: Cyprinidae). ME
Raley. Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede Avenue, St. Louis, MO 31303-2010 USA.

Prior to 1991, the sabine shiner, Notropis sabinae, was known only from drainages west of the Mississippi River. In
the process of describing the Yazoo shiner, N. rafinesquei, Suttkus noted the presence of Al. sabinae within the
Yazoo River, a system which Iles east of the Mississippi River. Further sampling uncovered yet another eastern
population within the Big Black River system. Upon preliminary examination, the latter population appears to show
morphological novelties for this group. Given the diversity exhibited among populations of Al. sabinae, a genetic data
set was assembled to aid in defining operational taxonomic units (OTUs, sensu Mayden and Wood, 1995) within this
species, and to suggest avenues for further study. Sequences were collected from the mitochondrial cytochrome b
gene from individuals representing the geographic range of this species and were subjected to phylogenetic and
population-level analyses. In all analyses, the Big Black River population was strongly supported as monophyletic
and distinct from any other population.




   320                          13:30 Sunday                                 GS1                              MCN
Quick and accurate identification of triggerfishes (Balistidae) using PCR with species-diagnostic
mitochondrial (12S/16S) primers. H.A. Balchowsky. Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center, 8000
Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004 USA.
Identification of ichthyoplankton (eggs, larvae, and juveniles) can be a challenging task due to their small sizes and
dynamic development. This problem is particularly acute for tropical and subtropical ichthyoplankton, most of which
can be identified to family-level only. As part of a broader initiative to develop molecular markers for tropical and
subtropical fish identification, we report on the utility of mitochondrial ribosomal gene sequences for triggerfish
species identification. A 1,510 bp fragment, containing portions of the mitochondrial ribosomal genes (12S, 16S) and
the complete tRNA valine gene, was sequenced from six triggerfish species (4 genera) inhabiting the western central
Atlantic Ocean. Forty-three sequences were examined to assess intra- and interspecific variation. Intraspecific
differences were minor (less than 0.5%); however, sufficient interspecific differences occur within this locus to allow
the design of robust species-specific PCR primers. When tested in a multiplex PCR assay, these primers yielded
species-diagnostic size fragments that unambiguously identified all 4 genera and 4 of the 6 species. Distinction
between the two Canthidermis congeners (0.9% interspecific variation) was not possible using this approach;
however, these congeners were readily distinguished using RFLP analysis of the PCR amplicon, we suggest that
molecular genetic approaches can provide a robust and rapid method to tackle long-standing problems in the
identification of fish species.




   321                          13:45 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
Evolution of karyotypes, reproductive organs, and trophic structures In the Goodeidae (Pisces:
Cyprindontiformes) based on nuclear and mithochondrial DNA phylogenies: The continuing sa^. L.E.
Thompson. The University of /Uabama, Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, Alabama
35487-0345 USA.
The family Goodeidae is a distinct North American lineage of freshwater fishes and is comprised of two monophyletic
subfamilies (Empetrichthyinae and Goodeinae). Empetrichthyinae contains all egg-laying species and Goodeinae
contains all viviparous spedes. The Goodeinae is recognized as a monophyletic group based on the presence of
unique morphological traits associated with internal fertilization and viviparity. The classification of goodeids has
been based largely on variation of reproductive and trophic characters. A molecular phylogenetic hypothesis is
presented based on the cladistic analysis of mtDNA (portions of the 16s rRNA, control region, and c^ochrome b
genes) and nDNA (a portion of the tyrosine kinase X-src gene) of representative goodeid fishes. The comparative
method based on the molecular phylogeny was used to reconstruct the evolution or key characters traditionally used
in the classification of the group such as: trophotaeniae (external projections of the embryonic gut that absorb
maternal nutrients), karyot^es, and tooth and jaw structures. The phylogeny agrees with some but not all
conclusions from earlier studies regarding phylogenetic relationships and reproductive and trophic character
evolution.

Deiween irie uusivy                 fjui9fjvpunn;aiiat ariu uie uiiwtsopui                           neiauve yui leiiyiii
is significantly different between the two damselfish species. Dusky damselfish have a relative gut length ratio (gut
length/standard length) of 1.20 and a Zihler indes ((gut length/(weighM/3)) if 3.42. Values for the threespot
damselfish are 3.01 and 824 respectively. Despite striking differences in RGL and Zl, the gut retention time is the
same for both species. Additionally, only protein assimilation efficiency (and thus total assimilation efficiency) varies
between species; significantly mote protein is assimilated by the threespot damselfish than the dusky damselfish.
These results have several important implications. First, as both species feed on the same algal diet, the greater
assimilation efficiency of the threespot damselfish may translate into faster growth rates and greater reproductive
capacity. Second, it has long been held that relative gut length ratios of herbivorous fishes fall between 2 and 21,
with most herbivorous damselfishes in the range of 5. The significantly lower relative gut length of dusky damselfish,
unquestionably an herbivore, challenges trophic classifications based on relative gut length ratios. Third, gut
moqihologiss are often used in phylogenetic analyses. These two damselfish are closely related congeners yet their
gut morphologies vary significantly. This questions the applicability of such characters in phylogenetic analyses.




                                                                                              MCN
Are you considering transplantantion as a management tod? Be cautious - mixing gene pods may be more
harmful than helpful due to outbreeding depression. J.D. Hemandez-Martich. The University of Georgia
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.

Mixing gene pools may cause outbreeding depression (OD). However, it is unknown what kind and degree of
between-mate dissimilarity should exist for OD to occur. The Optimum Outbreeding Paradigm (OOP) predicts
inbreeding depression (ID) for offspring of close relatives. As similarities between mates decrease, offspring fitness
increases, reaches an optimal level and then decreases to levels below parental fitness (i. e., OD occurs).
Populations of eastern mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki: Poeciliidae) from the Piedmont and Coastal Plain of two
drainages were used as sources of fish for seven crosses and six pure controls each replicated in four mesocosms.
OD occurred in populations of some crosses between fish from different regions and/or drainages. There were
significantly more extinct populations among those founded with fish from the same vs. different region/drainage
sections (7of 20 vs. 3 of 32). Population size and growth rate, fecundity and juvenile survival were significantly lower
for populations of crosses of fish from different regions and/or drainages than for those of their controls. I examined
potential predictors of OD and the per-locus number of unshared alleles (Nu) between sources was the best
predictor under the OOP. Optimum outcrossing and OD are expected when Nu = 0.25 and >0.45, respectively.




   323                          14:15 Sunday                                  GS1                               MCN
Evolution of the biomechanical attributes of long bones in fish, amphibians, and reptiles.               G.M. Erickson.
Biomechanical Engineering Division, Mechanical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-
3030 USA.
Long bones are the major skeletal elements of vertebrate appendages. The radiations of many vertebrate clades
were facilitated by locomotory innovations Involving these elements (e.g. the terrestrial diversification of tetrapods)
and thus it is necessa^ to understand how these elements changed biomechanically to more fully understand
vertebrates evolution. Biomechanical attributes of long bones such as strength, modulus, and loading conditions are
well documented in avian and mammalian taxa. However, data for taxa from outgroup clades are virtually non­
existent and the results from the few studies that have been conducted are not in accord with those obtained for bird
and mammal bones. In order to provide a better understanding of skeletal evolution, I conducted a series of
biomechanical tests on long bones from a diversity of fish, amphibians, and reptiles that possessed basal locomotory
attributes within their respective clades. Evolutionary trends were assessed using phylogenetic character analysis.
The results suggest; 1) material properties (strength, modulus, and failure strain) did not vary throughout evolution,
2) in vivo strain regimes increased Independently in birds and mammals, 3) the capacity of long bones to functionally
adapt is a plesiomorphic osteichthyan trait, and 4) size and shape changes were the primary means by which long
bones changed to meet evolutionary locomotory challenges.




   324                          14:30 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
Comparative locomotor kinematics of three stingray species (Taeniura lymma, Dasyatls americana, and D.
sabina}. L.J. Rosenberger. University of Chicago, Dept. OBA, 1027 E. 57th, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Locomotion in stingrays occurs as waves are propagated along their broadly expanded pectoral fins and can range
from being undulatory to oscillatory. This study compares swimming behavior in three stingray species (Taeniura
lymma, DasyaBs americana, D. sabina} differing in fin design (disc shape) as measured by aspect ratio (AR). Three-
dimensional video recordings captured swimming kinematics over a range of velocities for the three species.
Results indicate that D. americana (highest AR) has a significantly lower wing beat frequency and lower number of
waves than the other two species. Wing amplitude, as a percentage of wing span, differs significantly in T. lymma
(highest) and D. sabina (lowest). The results of frequency and number of waves corroborate previous studies
suggesting that higher aspect ratio fins tend to have a lower frequency and lower number of waves than low aspect
ratio fins; however, the amplitudo data does not lit the prediction of high AR fins having greater amplitude. Overall, D.
americana falls more toward the oscillatory end of the continuum and T. lymma falls toward the undulatory end, with
D. sabina somewhere in between these two.   325                 . ,      14:45 Sunday                                   GS1                                MCN
Light attenuating molecules In the lens of the fish eye.            M. Posner. Dept, of Biological Sciences, Univ, of
Southern California, Los, Angeles, CA, 90089; Section of Vertebrates, Natural History Museum of Los, Angeles
County, 900 Exposition Blvd., Los Angeles, CA, 90007 USA.
The ocular lens of fishes contains mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), which attenuate short wavelengths of light.
The causes for the varied distribution of MAAs in the lenses of different fish species are still in question. In this study
I examined the lenticular MAA content of 42 flatfish species (order Pleuronectiformes) from nine families to
investigate the controlling factors on lens pigmentation and changes in pigmentation during ontogeny. MAAs were
actively transporteri and concentrated by fie lens from the surrounding humors in the eye. These MAAs produced
two absorbance peaks when analyzed spectrophotometrically, one near 320 nm and another near 360 nm. The
relative amounts of different MAAs in the lens was correlated with phylogeny, while the total MAA concentration
reflected the depth distribution of each species. Species living in deeper water contained lower concentrations of
MAAs. Both the total amount of MAAs and their relative proportions changed during ontogeny. MAAs began
accumulating after settlement, and increased in concentration with standard length. The phylogenetic trend in the
relative proportion of MAA peaks suggests that lens pigmentation is under genetic control. This control is not
exerted by the lens itself, but may occur at the level of food metabolism.




   326                        ...16:00 Sunday                                  GS1                                MCN
The effects of chronic and periodic acute hypoxia on the growth and physiology of Juvenile southern
flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma. J.C. Tavlor. Department of Zoology, Box 7617, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC , 27695.
Dissolved oxygen (DO) is proving to be one of the most important determinants of Juvenile fish growth and survival
in our estuaries. Laboratory experiments were conducted to determine the effects of chronic hypoxia and periodic
acute hypoxia on the growth, metabolic rate and blood hematocrit of juvenile southern flounder, Paralichthys
lethostigma. Fish were maintained in aquaria having constant salinity (15 psu) and temperature (25 °C) and
exposed to constant normoxia (6 mg 02 P-l), constant hypoxia (2.75) an intermediate level (4.5), and a diel
oscillating treatment (daily mean = 4.5 mg 02 k^l). Results from the blood hematocrit analysis indicate a
secondary stress response to the nocturnal hypoxia in the oscillating treatment resulting in increased blood
hematocrit levels. Flounder also exhibited limited growth in the low DO treatment (1.9 % Wt d*-1, p<0.001)
suggesting a species-level limiting oxygen concentration for growth between the low (2.75) and intermediate (4.5)
DO levels. Furthermore, fish in the oscillating treatment realized growth similar to the intermediate treatment
indicating that daily growth is a function of the daily mean DO concentrations. This hypothesis is supported by the
dramatic overcompensafion in the afternoon routine respiration rates exhibited by the oscillating treatment. Further
work is necessary to address the synergistic effects of temperature and variable DO on the grrjwth and physiology
of juvenile estuarine dependent fish.




  . 327                          16:15 Sunday                                  GSI                                MCN
The influence of temperature on the otolith-somatic growth relationship for Juvenile southern flouiKier,
Paralichthys lethostigma. D.D. Davis. NCSU; Dept, of Zoology; Box 7617; Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.
Temperature effects on the ofolith-somatio growth relationship of southern flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma were