50m) and latitudinal
gradient (8 to 18 degrees). Phylogeny of the bush frogs was reconstructed with a ~2600bp data matrix (4
mtDNA and 2 nuclear) using Bayesian and maximum likelihood methods. We included outgroups
composed of members from major genera in rhacophoridae. Spatial analyses is based on &gt;1900 point
records. Lineages were delimited based on multiple criteria and a final dated tree was generated using
secondary calibration points. RESULTS: Analyses uncovered a spectacular radiation of bush frogs
consisting of 61 lineages (including &gt;19 new species) with two strongly supported clades: north and
south, separated by the geographic barrier. Ancestral range reconstructions showed that there has been
limited dispersal across this barrier, highlighting its significant role in the initial diversification of bush frog
clade. In addition, presence of a deeply nested clade consisting of SE Asian members in the northern
clade supports a single out-of-Peninsular India range expansion and a vicariance scenario. Constant rate
model of diversification was rejected (Gamma= -2.329) at the scale of Western Ghats. The initial
diversification of the north and south clades coincides with Oligocene glaciation followed by an
accelerated diversification during the Miocene. Out-of-Peninsular India range expansion coincides with
the Mid-Miocene Climate Optimum. Species richness in space was strongly influenced by latitude (Rsq=-
0.853***) with a greater concentration of species in southern Western Ghats. In addition, comparison of
northern and southern clades showed that the southern clade is species rich with greater proportion of
endemics and also exhibit greater morphological and ecological diversity. These results support the
existence of a southern refugia and it‘s role in the adaptive radiation of Western Ghats bush frogs.



Vila Pouca, Catarina (CIBIO - University of Porto); Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO - University of Porto, Vairão,
Portugal); Mucientes, Gonzalo (Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas, CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Humphries,
Nick; Sims, David (Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

High-resolution diving behaviour revealed by satellite tagging of blue sharks

Recent advances in satellite tagging technologies have provided increased resolution in studying the
movements, patterns of activity and behaviour of individual animals in relation to different environmental
features. Such accurate records of long term vertical movements of large predators at fine temporal
resolutions have enabled the identification of variable behavioural patterns amongst species, such as diel
temporal shifts in behaviour. In addition, by investigating diving behaviour in relation to changing
oceanographic variables and to potential foraging success, we are beginning to understand why such
behaviours occur at particular times and places. The characteristics of dive profiles, including dive shape,
have often been useful to address such questions. For most species, dives can be classified into
predefined dive types based on their two dimensional shape, and these types, or the dive characteristics



                                                                                                                751
within a type, may reflect activities such as foraging, travelling or resting. Concerning marine fish, two
main dive types, V- and U-shaped, have been largely identified. Overall it is thought that V-shaped dives
are associated with transiting/prey searching behaviour, while U-shaped profiles are related to foraging
on aggregated prey. The identification of different habitat uses, namely transiting and foraging areas, by
analysing the spatial distribution of the dive profiles is of great importance to the recognition of key marine
habitats. Thus, the ability to identify such critical habitats, by combining data from many different species
including large pelagic predators, may be a valuable tool when identifying potential marine protected
areas. Here we analysed high resolution data (10s) on depth and temperature experienced by satellite
tagged blue sharks Prionace glauca in the eastern Atlantic Ocean and obtained a detailed description of
their vertical movements. A total of 2890 dives by 4 blue sharks were recorded. Five dive types,
previously described for other species, were found to be commonly performed by blue sharks. Type 1 (U-
shaped) and 2 (V-shaped) dives were the most frequently performed by blue sharks (ca. 48% and 32% of
the total number of dives, respectively) with all other dive types each representing &lt;6% of the total.
Dives that did not conform to the generic classiﬁcation scheme represented 9.8% of total dives. Further
analyses examined spatial and temporal patterns of diving profiles in the eastern Atlantic Ocean.



Vinnikov, Kirill (University of Hawaii at Manoa);

Phylogenetic relationships and morphological diversity of Awaous and Stenogobius species
(Gobiidae)

Amphidromous gobies are the common representatives of native freshwater fish fauna in tropical and
subtropical islands and in a coastal zone throughout the whole Indo-Pacific region. These fishes are
similar by having a marine larval stage that presumably allows them to spread out from one island to
another. After recent morphological and molecular studies, most genera of amphidromous gobies were
combined into one monophyletic subfamily Sicydiinae. However, phylogenetic relationships of some other
amphidromous genera of gobies remained unresolved due to a lack of sampling. In the present study I
aimed to analyze the phylogenetic relationships between two genera Awaous and Stenogobius, which
were not included to Sicydiinae, as well as to check taxonomic validity of their species by using both 62
morphological characters and COI mitochondrial gene sequences. Several sicydiine gobies were used as
the ingroup sister taxa and two genera, Gnatholepis and Acanthogobius, were added as the outgroup to
the current phylogenetic analysis. Small samples of each species from the different geographic locations
including South Africa, Hawaiian Islands, French Polynesia, Society Islands, Solomon Islands, Guam,
Vanuatu, Fiji and New Caledonia were used as taxonomic units in maximum parsimony, maximum
likelihood and Bayesian approaches. Most trees, which resulted from the reconstructions with
morphological data, showed higher statistical support for the relationships between different genera, while
the analyses with only nucleotide sequences gave better evidence for the species and intraspecific
relationships. All phylogenetic approaches revealed paraphyly for Awaous species. The genus
Stenogobius was placed as the basal group for subfamily Sicydiinae. Although there was a divergence
within Stenogobius group with high support values, the branch lengths of all species were relatively short
in comparison with species from the other genera that indicates recent colonization events and
presumably high migration rates in some cases, where support was not significant. The latter may be the
reason of very high morphological similarity between all Stenogobius species. On the contrary,
remarkable morphological differences between males and females as well as between different age
groups were observed in Stenogobius hawaiiensis from the one stream on Oahu Island (Hawaii).
Obtained results also support the evidence that species with longer marine larval period have the largest
range of their distribution.




                                                                                                           752
Vitt, Laurie (Sam Noble Museum);

Walking the Natural History Trail

Nearly all, if not all, conceptual studies and hypotheses that we test in biology begin with natural history
observations. Nevertheless, Natural History has almost become a bad word in biological sciences.
Funding agencies do not have a category for Natural History studies. The last Professor of Natural
History that I know of was Dr. Ken Norris of the University of California, Santa Cruz. I trace my history as
a herpetologist, pointing out how basic natural history studies led me to ask conceptual questions. I begin
with childhood observations on garter snakes, rattlesnakes, and scorpions and travel from the open
sagebrush lands of Montana to the Sonoran Desert, the swamplands of South Carolina, then to the New
World Tropics with natural history stories and their implications for conceptual biology. I end with a few
comments on what I view as particularly exciting frontiers that take advantage of modern technologies
and methods.



Vojar, Jirí (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague); Dolezalová,
Jana (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic); Solský, Milic (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague,
Prague, Canada)

Technical reclamation and spontaneous succession produce different water habitats: A case
study from Czech post-mining sites

Despite the ecological value of unreclaimed post-mining areas, in the Czech Republic, however, rigorous
technical reclamation still prevails. Such approach usually leads to a more uniform environment and
destroys the habitat diversity of successional sites, including the variety of water bodies that are crucial
habitats for many aquatic and semiaquatic species. The aim of our study was to assess the water
environment on reclaimed and unreclaimed post-mining sites from an ―amphibian point of view‖. We
compared the proportion of water habitat area, the number of ponds and their habitat features on 14
technically reclaimed and 6 unreclaimed sections of spoil banks in the North Bohemian brown coal basin
in the Czech Republic. The proportion of water area, number of ponds per hectare of spoil bank, and
number of ponds in a vicinity of 300 m were significantly higher on successional sections than on
reclaimed sections of spoil banks. We also found on successional areas a higher proportion of smaller
shallow ponds, with gentle shore slopes, partial insolation of water surface and partial vegetation cover.
The ponds on technically reclaimed parts of spoil banks were larger and deeper, with steeper shore
slopes, full insolation and partial vegetation cover. We conclude that primary succession leads to a more
preferable environment for amphibians than does technical reclamation, and it should be considered as
an equal type of post-mining site restoration.




                                                                                                        753
von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Pitman, Nigel
(Center for Tropical Conservation, Duke University, Canada); Catenazzi, Alessandro (Department of
Biology, Gonzaga University, Canada); Koo, Michelle S. (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of
California, Berkeley, Canada); Rodríguez, Lily O. (Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional
Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada); Yánez-Muñoz, Mario H. (Museo Ecuatoriano de Ciencias
Naturales, Quito, Ecuador, Canada); Mueses-Cisneros, Jonh Jairo (Fundación para la Investigación en
Biodiversidad Amazónica (FIBA), Colombia, Canada); Venegas, Pablo J. (Centro de Ornitología y
Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), Lima, Perú, Canada); Knell, Guillermo (Ecologística Perú, Lima, Perú,
Canada); Rivera, Dani (Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima,
Perú, Canada); Markel, Jon; Vriesendorp, Corine (Environment, Culture, and Conservation (ECCo), The
Field Museum, Canada); Gordo, Marcelo (Departamento de Biologia/ICB, Universidade Federal do
Amazonas, Manaus, Brasil, Canada)

An evaluation of the impact of a rapid inventories program on amphibian conservation in the
Andes-Amazon region of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia

The Environment, Culture, and Conservation Department of the Field Museum (ECCo) is best known for
its rapid inventories of remote, poorly known forests in the Andes-Amazon region
(http://fm2.fieldmuseum.org/rbi/). During these two-to-three week inventories, international teams of
biologists survey the flora and fauna of sites that have been identified by host nations as high
conservation priorities but have often never before been visited by biologists. While the biologists survey
forests and rivers, sociologists and anthropologists visit nearby communities to explore conservation
opportunities with local residents. Over the past 12 years, ECCo has conducted 16 inventories in the
Andes-Amazon region. The information collected in these expeditions has so far helped create new
protected areas covering several million hectares. What is often overlooked is these surveys‘ impact on
the conservation of specific taxonomic groups. ECCo‘s rapid inventories have catalyzed the
establishment of 12 new parks, which together protect more than 4 million hectares of high-quality
amphibian habitat. Protection has been strengthened for a similarly sized area. The newly protected
habitats are focused in the Andes-Amazon region, home to the most diverse amphibian communities on
Earth. These habitats range from windswept Andean grasslands above 3000 m elevation to Amazonian
swamps only a few dozen meters above sea level, from white sand forests to peat bogs to savannas, all
of them crisscrossed by rivers, streams, lakes, and pools that are home to literally millions of rare,
threatened, and poorly known amphibians. We evaluated the impact of ECCo‘s rapid inventories
program on the conservation of amphibians in Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia. We conducted a
comprehensive review of the datasets generated during these inventories and found that over 220
amphibian species live in the survey areas. About 10-12 of these species were new to science; four of
them have been formally described whereas the others are currently being described. The new parks
protect a significant portion of the habitat of approximately 200 amphibian species. While only 10 of these
species



von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Angulo, Ariadne
(Departamento de Herpetologia, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos,
Lima, Peru, Canada); Catenazzi, Alessandro (Department of Biology, Gonzaga University, Canada);
Aguilar, César (Departamento de Herpetología, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor
de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada); Siu-Ting, Karen (Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Unit,
National University of Ireland, Canada); Morales, Víctor R. (Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas y Museo de
Historia Natural, Universidad Ricardo Palma, Lima, Perú, Canada); Chaparro, Juan C. (Museo de Historia
Natural, Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cusco (MHNC), Cusco, Perú, Canada);
Gagliardi, Giussepe (Peruvian Center for Biodiversity and Conservation (PCB&C), Iquitos, Perú, Canada);
Venegas, Pablo J. (División de Herpetología, Centro de Ornitología y Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), Lima,




                                                                                                       754
Perú, Canada); Pérez, José (Departamento de Herpetología, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad
Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada)

The Peruvian Association of Herpetology

Between 150 and 200 herpetologists currently work in Peru. With such a large community of
professionals studying the amphibians and reptiles of Peru, a logical next step was to give a voice to this
community and to help inform and coordinate research and conservation initiatives, increase capacity
building and outreach through the creation of a professional society with a focus on Peruvian
herpetofauna. In this regard we would like to report that the Asociación Peruana de Herpetología (APH;
Peruvian Association of Herpetology) was legally established in 2011. The APH‘s mission is to promote
scientific activities that increase the knowledge on amphibians and reptiles in Peru and that contribute to
the advancement of international herpetology. The APH‘s founding members are associated with several
academic institutions, including universities in four different regions in Peru, as well as non-profit
organizations and natural history museums, and most of them are IUCN SSC Amphibian Specialist Group
members. We expect that the APH will promote collaboration among both national and foreign
colleagues, development of research proposals, and study plans throughout the country. We look forward
to seeing a significant growth in membership during the forthcoming years, and we welcome people
interested in joining and contributing to the growth of the APH.



von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Donnelly, Maureen
A. (Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Canada)

The relationship between leaf-litter frog assemblages and substrate characteristics in
southwestern Amazonian lowland forests

In this study, we evaluated the potential effect of soil and leaf-litter characteristics, and forest type, on the
local assemblage of Amazonian leaf-litter frogs. We used 5×5 m leaf-litter plots to quantify the species
richness and abundance of frogs at two lowland sites in south-eastern Peru. We found that soil and litter
characteristics explained part of the observed variation in species presence, richness, and relative
abundance of leaf-litter frogs. However, species exhibited individualistic responses: some species did not
show any association with the variables we measured while other species were strongly associated with
some variables. We found that soil total phosphorus concentration and, to a lesser extent, soil humidity,
leaf-litter mass, and soil pH explained part of the observed variation in species occurrence, richness, and
relative abundance. We also found that community structure of leaf-litter frogs varied between two distinct
forest types (floodplain and terra firme). Our study highlights the importance of considering both
microhabitat and macrohabitat characteristics when evaluating patterns of frog community structure.



Vörös, Judit (Hungarian Natural History Museum); Gál, Júlia Tünde (Szent István University, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, Department of Ecology, Canada); Dán, Ádám (Department of Molecular Biology,
Central Agricultural Office Veterinary Diagnostic Directorate, Canada); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales, Canada)

Chytridiomycosis in yellow-bellied toad (Bombina variegata) populations in Hungary

The amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) was first recognized in Europe in
Peñalara Mountains of Spain in 1997. Since then it was detected in most of Western Europe and part of
Central and Eastern Europe. Distribution of Bd in Hungary have been surveyed in the last few years and



                                                                                                             755
infected populations have been found throughout the country, mostly in the low elevation mountains of
North and West Hungary and in three taxa (Bombina variegata, Pelophylax esculentus complex and
Mesotriton alpestris). As the yellow-bellied toad (Bombina variegata) seems to carry the infection with
very high proportion we used the species for further monitoring. We followed a B. variegata population in
the Bakony Mountains for two years in 2010-2011 and applied individual identification coupled with Bd
screening. Overall 193 individuals were captured during the study period. In the first year the toads were
found in a lake which dried out for the next year when toads moved to the neighboring stream located in
the forest. Both prevalence and genomic equivalent values significantly decreased when toads spent
breeding season near the stream. Every specimen caught in the springtime and recaptured during the
summer or fall cleared the infection by the time of recapture. Similarly specimens tested positive in 2010
and recaptured in 2011 lost their infection during hibernation. Besides mapping the distribution of Bd in
Hungary and to survey the selected B. variegata population we also aimed to identify the phylogenetic
lineage of the pathogen infecting Hungarian amphibians. For that we used a nested PRC assay to amplify
the ribosomal ITS region. We found two haplotypes of Bd in Bombina variegata from which one was
identical to a haplotype previously found only in Ecuador and North America, and one belonged to a
global haplotype.



Waddle, Hardin (U.S. Geological Survey);

Long-term trends in anuran occupancy in the Atchafalaya Basin of Louisiana

The Atchafalaya River Basin in southern Louisiana is the largest contiguous tract of river bottomland
remaining in North America. The U.S. Geological Survey has been monitoring anuran amphibians in the
Atchafalaya for the last decade (2002–2012). Monitoring from 2002-2006 consisted of a series of
vocalization surveys conducted on rainy nights at 40 sites. Sampling was suspended in 2007 and from
2008-2012 monitoring resumed using both visual encounter surveys and vocalization surveys. Additional
sites have been added, but the majority of the 40 original sites are still being surveyed. This long-term
dataset provides an excellent opportunity to examine the occupancy dynamics of the 12 species of
anurans found in this area. Most of the species declined in site occupancy during the 2002-2006 period
when only vocalization surveys were employed. Analysis of the vocalization data from 2008-2012 will
reveal if this 5-yr trend was indicative of a long-term decline in occupancy or only the downward phase of
a cyclical occupancy pattern in the Atchafalaya. Examination of the visual encounter data from recent
surveys will also help determine the value of capture data in estimating occupancy and detecting a trend
relative to vocalization surveys alone. Because anurans call for specific purposes and calling is influenced
in various ways by environmental conditions, it may be difficult to account for all of the causes of
heterogeneity in detection probability using occupancy analysis based solely on vocalization surveys.
Combining visual detections may provide a dataset that is more reliable for determining true occupancy
dynamics and less disposed to trends than vocalization data only.



Wagner, Alexander (University of Vienna);

Skeletochronology of phalanges underestimates the true age of long-lived Alpine newts
(Ichthyosaura alpestris)

Skeletochronology has become the most widely used method of ageing amphibians. However, bone
remodelling, double lines and rapprochement of peripheral lines all hamper exact skeletochronological
age determination. In a long-term field study, the age of long-lived Alpine newts ( Ichthyosaura alpestris )



                                                                                                        756
from a high-altitude population was estimated from cross-sections of phalanges at the time of tagging with
PIT tags and again 10–16 years later.              The skeletochronologically assessed age at recapture
underestimated the time since first capture by 2–19 years, and the observed deviance increased with
increasing age estimates at first capture. It is very likely that most skeletochronological studies at high
altitude or latitude conducted so far have underestimated the true age of amphibians.           Although the
reliability of skeletochronological age estimates is higher in short-lived amphibian species, there is a need
to develop new techniques to permanently mark young metamorphs. Annotation from the author: Walter
Hödl (University of Vienna) has affirmed my decision to submit this paper because of the importance of
this study for amphibian age determination.



Wagner, Norman (Trier University); Chipperfield, Joseph; Lötters, Stefan (Trier University, Trier,
Germany); Esch, Sandra (Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany, Canada); Veith,
Michael (Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany, Trier, Germany); Sinsch, Ulrich
(University of Koblenz-Landau, Department of Biology. Koblenz, Germany, Koblenz, Germany)

Can glyphosate-based herbicides contribute to amphibian population decline?

The use of glyphosate-based herbicides (GBH) is increasing globally, especially so after the adoption of
genetically modified herbicide-resistant crops. Several lab and mesocosm studies have shown adverse
effects of GBH on amphibian individuals, particularly anuran larvae. Here we integrate information of
agrarian practices and amphibian biology to parameterise population models and investigate whether
GBH may contribute to declines both at the population and species level.



Wagner, Philipp (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United States)

Out of the blue: a preliminary review of the African whorl-tailed agamas (Agamidae:
Acanthocercus)

The African whorl-tailed agamas include two genera: the eight lizards in the genus Acanthocercus
Fitzinger, 1843 are widespread in savannas and woodland, while the two Xenagama Boulenger, 1895
species occur from woodland to semi-deserts to savannah areas. Most of the species occur in the nearly
herpetologically unexplored areas in the Horn of Africa. Two are present in the southwestern part of the
Arabian Peninsula, but on the African continent only a single species, A. atricollis, is known to occur
outside the Horn region.

In general, relationships between these whorl-tailed species as well as the relations of these genera to
the Asian whorl-tailed lizards and other members of the Agaminae are poorly understood. A robust
phylogeny of the whorl-tailed lizards as well as a good understanding of diagnostic characters and
species delimitation are required. Relationships and distinctions between subspecies of the A. atricollis
Smith, 1849 complex are particularly vexing, but the boundaries between other Acanthocercus species
are also unresolved. However, African whorl-tailed agamas are an ideal group for testing zoogeographic
hypotheses of colonization events in the so-called ‗arid corridor‘ linking the Horn of Africa to the
southwest arid region. We provide a preliminary morphological and molecular phylogeny of the whorl-
tailed agamas that clarifies species limits and establishes their position within the Agaminae. First results
support that the diagnostic value of the whorl-tail has been over estimated and that Acanthocercus is a
mixed genus including several distinct lineages which will be described as new genera. The species
status of A. cyanogaster is supported and it is clearly distinct from A. atricollis, with which it has often




                                                                                                         757
been considered conspecific. A preliminary review of the A. atricollis complex shows that several
subspecies ust be elevated to species rank.



Wagner, Philipp (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United States)

Zoogeography of arid Africa

The African tropical rain forests, extending from southern Senegal in the west to the East African coastal
forests of Kenya and Tanzania in the east harbor a huge number of reptile species and have been
inventoried. A zoogeographical analysis revealed complex faunal ―relationships‖ between the forests but
also gave insight to the ―arid history‖ of the continent. A comparison of distribution patterns of both arid
and rainforest species shows two main corridors allowing a migration of arid species from north to south
and east to west in sub-Saharan Africa and indicates a possible colonization of Africa by certain taxa from
the southwestern Arabian Peninsula. However, the analysis also shows that our knowledge of arid Africa
is limited and that savannah eco-regions and dry woodlands seem to be the most unexplored parts of the
continent.



Wahbe, Tanya (University of British Columbia); Yueh, Hesther (University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada); Bury, R. Bruce (USGS Forest and Rangeland Ecosystem Science Center,
Corvallis, OR, United States); Welsh, Hartwell (USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research
Station, Arcata, CA, United States); Ritland, Kermit; Ritland, Carol (University of British Columbia,
Department of Forest Sciences, Vancouver, BC, Canada)

Tailed Frogs in the Pacific Northwest: Genetic variation, isolation, and population status

The tailed frog (Ascaphus) is endemic to the Pacific Northwest of North America and is sometimes placed
in its own family, Ascaphidae. It is among the most primitive of living frogs. Coastal tailed frogs (Ascaphus
truei) range from BC southward to northern California in coastal drainages, and Rocky Mountain tailed
frogs (A. montanus) occur in western Montana, northern Idaho, and southeast BC. They are fairly evenly
distributed along their coastal range, but more scattered in their interior range. They frequent
mountainous, coniferous forests with cool, clear streams. In Canada, A. truei is listed as special concern
(―at risk‖) and A. montanus is endangered. In the US, they are protected at the state level. Several studies
demonstrate fragmentation impacts on Ascaphus populations. Reduced genetic diversity found in a
degraded habitat was consistent with demographic data showing reduced larval movement, adult
dispersal and breeding adults in clearcut habitats (Wahbe et al. 2005). These studies also support a
smaller effective population size. Absence of forest cover was a key restrictor of genetic connectivity in a
study examining landscape-level gene flow. Nielson et al. (2006) split Ascaphus into two species (coastal
and interior). When estimating relationships among populations, Canadian and American researchers
reported strong genetic differences (i.e., low gene flow) suggesting a complex history of restrictions to
geographic refugia but also range expansions. We used mitochondrial cytochrome b and ND2 sequences
to further explore phylogeography from coastal BC to northern California and interior populations from
BC, Montana and Idaho. Using these molecular tools, we confirmed the global level of interior and coastal
divisions but locally restricted haplotypes in the coastal south---possibly reflecting greater genetic
diversity. Current evidence suggests that populations in degraded habitats have reduced genetic diversity
owing to lower effective population sizes and temporary contractions of population size. Based on existing
knowledge, we predict that there will be increased isolation of populations due to habitat fragmentation,
climate change, and further degradation of remaining habitat due to logging. Recolonization may be slow,




                                                                                                         758
if at all. Because Ascaphus populations exist in a metapopulation structure, population connectivity
should be maintained to ensure population persistence.



Waldman, Bruce (Seoul National University);

Conservation successes with Archey's Frog (Leiopelma archeyi) in New Zealand

New Zealand endemic frogs (genus Leiopelma ) are ‗living fossils‘, the most archaic lineage of living
anurans. Their conservation presents special challenges. The species exist in small, isolated or highly
fragmented populations, with limited gene flow and highly structured populations. Of most concern is
Archey‘s frog, Leiopelma archeyi . Populations surveyed in optimal habitat declined by over 80% since
1996. But in many areas where frogs were common in the early 1990s, none remain. After the discovery
of amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), infecting Canterbury hylid frogs in
1989, reducing risk of exposure of Leiopelma frogs to Bd became a primary management objective.
While a low proportion of Archey‘s frogs have been found infected by Bd in the field, infections have not
been observed to cause morbidity or mortality. Sick frogs have been frequently found in the field,
however. These frogs typically demonstrate clinical signs, including blisters and necrosis of epidermal
tissue, associated with other diseases. A captive breeding programme was established at the University
of Canterbury in 2002 to safeguard the species from disease. Infected individuals, rescued from the field,
showed full, spontaneous recovery within 6 months under optimised ex situ conditions. Soon after release
from quarantine, frogs successfully bred under conditions that simulated their natural habitat. Genetic
approaches, including selective breeding for MHC alleles known to confer disease resistance, should be
incorporated into management strategies to ensure successful reintroductions. Saving a species requires
detailed knowledge and appreciation of the organism‘s biology, solid scientific research, and meaningful
collaboration among researchers, government, zoos, and the public. Further studies are needed to
determine whether frogs remaining in the wild suffer from immunosuppression, and if so, to identify the
factors that are making them susceptible to disease. We share a responsibility to save Archey‘s frog,
ranked the most evolutionarily distinct amphibian in the world, from extinction.



Waldman, Bruce (Seoul National University); Cha, Moonsuk; Bataille, Arnaud; Fong, Jonathan; Baek,
Hae Jun; Lee, Hang; Min, Mi-Sook (Seoul National University, Canada)

Haplotype diversity and distribution of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in South Korea

The amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been associated with population
declines and extinctions of amphibians worldwide. Since the discovery in 2009 of Bd on the Asian
continent, in Korea, Bd has been detected in several Asian countries. However, the impact and history of
emergence of this pathogen in Asia remain unclear. We conducted a study to determine the prevalence,
diversity, and distribution of Bd in South Korea using a nested PCR assay to amplify and sequence its
ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region. We also estimated the intensity of infection in native
and introduced amphibians by a quantitative PCR method. We analysed swabs from 1978 individuals of
10 different amphibian species collected in 89 localities. Three hundred thirty-nine individuals tested
positive, with the highest Bd prevalence observed in the American bullfrog, Lithobates catesbeianus, and
the Jeju salamander, Hynobius quelpaertensis (18% in both species). ITS sequence was obtained from
106 infected individuals. A total of 36 haplotypes were identified, including 28 novel haplotypes not
previously reported. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that Korean haplotypes are highly diverse and
appear closely related to haplotypes that have been isolated in China and Japan. Levels of infection in



                                                                                                      759
Korean amphibians were low in all samples tested (Bd infection load < 300 zoospores/swab; N = 45),
consistent with initial observations in other Asian countries. Our results provide support for a historical
presence of the pathogen in Asia. Highest haplotype diversity and prevalence were observed near zones
of international access to the country (i.e., Incheon, Seoul, and Busan areas), whereas amphibians in the
most isolated regions of the country demonstrated the lowest Bd prevalence and haplotype diversity. The
data suggest an ongoing spread of multiple strains of the fungus, probably associated with urban
development, wildlife management, and the international pet trade.



Waldron, Jayme (University of South Carolina); Welch, Shane (University of South Carolina, Lugoff, SC,
United States); Johnson, Catherine (USDA Forest Service, Canada); Pauley, Thomas (Marshall
University, Canada)

Effects of Habitat Fragmentation on Cheat Mountain Salamander Demographics

The Cheat Mountain Salamander (CMS; Plethodon nettingi ) is a federally threatened species endemic
to high elevations of the Allegheny Mountains, West Virginia. Like most plethodontid salamanders, the
CMS has limited dispersal ability, making the species extremely sensitive to landscape change and
habitat fragmentation. We used repeated count surveys conducted along trails, roads, and control sites in
a natural experimental design to examine the effects of roads and recreational trails on local CMS
populations in the Monongahela National Forest, WV. We used occupancy models to assess whether
these forms of habitat fragmentation affected CMS demographics. Both roads and trails had significant
negative effects on CMS demographics as compared to control sites; however, recreational trails
appeared to have stronger negative effects as compared to roads. We suspect these results reflect the
cumulative effects of habitat fragmentation over a longer period of time, given that many trails were
located along old logging roads from the early twentieth century and study roads were relatively new. For
CMS populations, negative effects of habitat fragmentation may continue for decades, which should be
an important consideration when assessing the effects of human land use on this threatened species.



Walker, James (University of Arkansas); Weaver, Robert (Department of Biological Sciences, Central
Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States)

Discovery of the Parthenogenic Colorado Checkered Whiptail (Aspidoscelia neotesselata) in
Washington State

Whiptail lizards of the genus Aspidoscelis , occur throughout the southern and southwestern United
States, with the ranges of some species extending into southeastern Oregon and adjacent Idaho.
Throughout their composite range, whiptail lizards are associated with dry, open habitats, particularly
desert, grassland, and shrub-steppe. They are diurnal, active and widely-foraging heliothermic reptiles
that prey on invertebrates, and occasionally small vertebrates. Several species of Aspidoscelis are
comprised solely of females (i.e., unisexual) and reproduce by parthenogenesis, a form of asexual
reproduction in which offspring are genetically identical to their diploid, triploid, or tetraploid mothers. Of
the 22 currently recognized species of Aspidoscelis found in the United States, 10 reproduce
parthenogenically. These populations may occur in limited areas unoccupied by sexual species and in
disturbed habitats, but some parthenogenetic species of Aspidoscelis are also widely syntopic with
sexual species. In the Pacific Northwest there are 2 species of whiptail lizard, Western Whiptail (
Aspidoscelis tigris ) and Plateau Striped Whiptail ( Aspidoscelis velox ). The former is a native bisexual
species found throughout North American deserts from southeastern Oregon and southern Idaho, south



                                                                                                           760
into mainland México and Baja California. Aspidoscelis velox is an introduced, unisexual species whose
natural range is the Colorado Plateau region of northern Arizona, southwestern Colorado, northwestern
New Mexico, and southeastern Utah. The Colorado Checkered Whiptail ( Aspidoscelis neotesselata )
was described in 1997 and is endemic to southeastern Colorado. Aspidoscelis neotesselata is a
parthenogenetic species that originated as the result of hybridization between a diploid unisexual
Common Checkered Whiptail ( Aspidoscelis tesselata ), and a diploid sexual species, Six-lined
Racerunner ( A. sexlineata ). The result of reproduction between a unisexual and a sexual species is an
extra set of chromosomes possessed by A. neotesselata , resulting in triploidy. Within the limited natural
range of A. neotesselata in a 4 county area, it is known from scattered localities along the Arkansas
River and tributaries. Like many other parthenogenic species, A. neotesselata inhabits disturbed areas,
such as canyonlands, campgrounds, and heavily grazed pastureland. Here we present the discovery of
A . neotesselata



Walker, Jr., H.J. (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Smith, W. Leo (The Field Museum, Chicago, CA,
United States)

Establishing and maintaining tissue collections for DNA

Liquid nitrogen is currently the best method for the long-term preservation of tissues for DNA research.
However, there are effective alternatives for those collections that do not have the space or funding for
liquid nitrogen facilities. A brief survey of the some the largest repositories of fish tissues in the United
States has revealed that the overwhelming majority of tissues has been preserved in ethanol, and that
many of those tissues subsequently have been deposited into freezers of various kinds. We will discuss
some of the advantages and disadvantages of liquid nitrogen, ethanol, dimethyl sulfoxide, standard and
ultra-cold freezing, etc., with additional reference to both Sanger and next-generation DNA sequencing
technologies.



Walls, Susan (USGS-Southeast Ecological Science Center); Barichivich, William (USGS Southeast
Ecological Science Center, Gainesville, United States); Brown, Mary (USGS Southeast Ecological
Science Center, Gainesvillle, United States)

Occupancy dynamics in a pair of pond-breeding amphibians: Testing contrasting predictions
about the impacts of climate change

Climate change is anticipated to be one of the major drivers of ecological change of this century. In the
last three decades, the average annual temperature in the southeastern U.S. has risen approximately
1.1°C, with the greatest increase occurring in winter. During this time, precipitation has decreased,
primarily in winter and spring. Continuation of these trends could negatively impact pond-breeding
amphibians, especially those that rely on winter and spring rains to fill seasonal wetlands, trigger
breeding, and ensure reproductive success. From 2009 to 2012, we monitored two winter-breeding
amphibians (the Ornate Chorus Frog [OCF], Pseudacris ornata, and the Mole Salamander [MS],
Ambystoma talpoideum) at St. Marks National Wildlife Refuge, in northwest FL, USA. Life histories differ
in these species: MS typically occurs in long-hydroperiod wetlands and exhibits paedomorphosis,
whereas OCF preferentially breeds in fishless, ephemeral ponds with short hydroperiods. We predicted
that, under a scenario of ongoing drought, estimates of local extinction would increase and occurrence
probabilities would decrease for MS if breeding sites dried prematurely. Because OCF has high
dispersal, short larval periods, and exploits ephemeral ponds, we predicted that this species would



                                                                                                         761
occupy sites at or near historically known breeding sites if inundated long enough for successful larval
development. Under these conditions, occupancy for OCF should be stable over time, but could
decrease in years of severe drought. We deployed automated recorders to monitor calling activity of
OCF and used traps to capture MS at upland ponds. Overall, approximately 22% and 62% of the ponds
we sampled were occupied by MS and OCF, respectively. For MS, model-averaged estimates of
occupancy probabilities, corrected for imperfect detection, progressively decreased over time as drought
severity increased. Estimates of extinction probabilities for MS increased from 0.0 to 0.699 over the
course of our study, whereas estimates of colonization probabilities were low (0.085-0.096) and less
variable. These results suggest that the decline in occupancy may have been due to an increase in the
probability of extinction rather than a decrease in the probability of colonization. In contrast, estimates of
occupancy probabilities for OCF were stable over time, except for one year with breeding failure due to
dry ponds. These results demonstrate that species with contrasting life histories may respond differently
to perturbations such as drought. Under the current scenario of rapid global ecological change, it is
especially important that a species‘ life history and ecology serve as the foundation for predictions about
climate change impacts, as well as for identifying species as ―models‖ for studying environmental change.



Walsh, Cathy (Mote Marine Laboratory); Luer, Carl; Yordy, Jennifer; Miedema, Jodi; Leigh, Brittany;
Adams, Philip (Mote Marine Laboratory, Canada)

Epigonal Conditioned Medium from Bonnethead Shark Induces Apoptosis in T-cell Leukemia
Cells, and Preferentially Targets Breast Cancer Cells Compared with Normal Breast Cells

Protein factors secreted into the surrounding medium by short-term cultures of epigonal cells (epigonal
conditioned medium, ECM) from bonnethead shark ( Sphyrna tiburo ) are cytotoxic against human tumor
cells in vitro . Using a T-cell leukemia cell line (Jurkat) as target cells, apoptotic pathway intermediates
affected by ECM treatment were identified through western blotting, and protein and PCR arrays.
Western blotting and gene expression indicated significant decreases in the apoptosis inhibitor, XIAP, at
both the protein and genetic levels in response to ECM treatment. A significant increase in expression
of the adaptor protein, FADD, was observed at the protein level in response to 2 mg/ml ECM. Protein
array analysis indicated treatments at both 1 mg/ml and 2 mg/ml ECM resulted in greater than 120%
relative increase in expression of Fas, as well as apoptosis promoters bad and bax. At the same ECM
treatments, analysis using a human apoptosis array kit showed significant changes in expression of some
caspase genes, adaptor proteins, and death receptors.         To determine effect of ECM on normal cells,
growth inhibition was measured in paired malignant/non-malignant cell lines derived from human breast
tissue (Hs 578T/Hs 578Bst), with statistically greater growth inhibition demonstrated in transformed cells
(Hs 578T) compared with normal cells (Hs 578Bst) in response to both 1 and 2 mg ECM protein/ml. A
PCR array focused on death receptor pathways showed significant up-regulation of CASP8, BID, and
TRAF2 in transformed cells compared with normal cells in response to 2 mg/ml ECM treatment. Several
decoy receptor genes (TNFRSF10C, TNFRSF6B, TNFRSF10D) were also down-regulated in transformed
cells compared to normal cells following treatment with 2 mg/ml ECM.



Wang, Ian (Harvard University);

Strong selection in a polymorphic poison frog

Aposematic coloration should be subject to strong stabilizing selection because individuals that vary from
a predator-recognized warning signal will incur a greater risk of predation.     Nevertheless, significant



                                                                                                          762
color variation does exist in some aposematic species.     Field and lab-based studies have identified
potentially important sources of natural and sexual selection.    However, the strength of stabilizing
selection on aposematic coloration has seldom been quantified. In this study, I measure the strength of
selection on coloration in an aposematic poison frog using population genetic methods along steep
phenotypic clines.



Wang, Yuan (IVPP, Chinese Academy of Sciences); Evans, Susan (UCL, London, Canada); Dong,
Liping (IVPP, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Canada)

New research on Chinese Mesozoic lissamphibians and squamates

Paleoherpetology has been thriving in China for the past 15 years, particularly with respect to specimens
from Mesozoic strata in northeastern China. The fossils include frogs, salamanders, turtles, lizards, and
choristoderans, and are often well-preserved as complete skeletons, some even with soft tissue
impressions, such as external gills, eyes, and fins. Rare occurrences of body scalation, stomach
contents, and unborn young have also been documented.

Chinese Mesozoic lissamphibian and squamate fossils have been the focus of study because they
provide not only important information on the early evolution and paleoecology of relevant clades, but
also help to understand some biological aspects of modern taxa. The discoveries can be referred to two
separate biotae that lived in the same region of northeastern China (Liaoning and Hebei provinces, Inner
Mongolia Autonomous Region): the Midde/Late Jurassic Daohugou Biota (―Yanliao Biota‖ of some
authors) and the Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota. The former bears, at generic level, four caudates
(Chunerpeton, Jeholotriton, Liaoxitriton,Pangerpeton) and one squamate (―Yabeinosaurus‖), as well as
two other unnamed lizards; the latter has yielded four named anurans (Callobatrachus, Liaobatrachus,
Mesophryne[=Dalianbatrachus],       Yizhoubatrachus),    four    urodelans    (Laccotriton, Liaoxitriton,
Regalerpeton,Sinerpeton),       and    five   squamates      (Yabeinosaurus[=Jeholacerta],    Xianglong,
Dalinghosaurus, Liaoningolacerta (nomendubium), Liushusaurus).

In the last three years, new research has increased our knowledge of these fossil groups. The anurans in
the Jehol Biota are probably not as diversified as originally proposed. They all have amphicoelous centra
and nine presacrals, and may be referred to a single genus, with slight differences at specific level.
Phylogenetic analyses suggest that they lie outside crown group anurans, but are more advanced than
taxa from the Jurassic of North and South America.

Research on fossil salamanders has proved more fruitful with respect to biology and ecology than to
phylogeny. The phylogeny of living caudates is not fully resolved, and is complicated by the addition of
Mesozoic fossil representatives. The frequency of paedomorphosis within Caudata undoubtedly adds to
the difficulties of coding of juvenile and adult characters in a cladistic analysis. However, the exceptional
preservation of the Chinese fossil material has revealed interesting aspects of their biology. Multiple
specimens of the Jurassic crown group salamander, Chunerpeton tianyiensis, show a range of limb
anomalies, including polydactyly, polymely, and abnormal phalangeal numbers, comparable to those
found in some living salamander populations. Also significant is the discovery of stomach contents in
Chunerpeton and the neotenic stem-caudate Jeholotriton which show that these two salamanders ate
insects and conchostracans respectively. Prey selection is clear from food size and type, providing the
first direct fossil evidence of predator-prey relationship in Mesozoic caudates.

Work on squamates from the same localities has similarly revealed new information on both phylogeny
and paleobiology. New material of the long-established taxonYabeinosaurushas not only permitted more



                                                                                                         763
rigorous phylogenetic analysis, but has revealed it to be a large, slow growing lizard that, while mainly
terrestrial, also preyed on fish. Furthermore, one recently recovered specimen contains more than fifteen
late stage embryos, providing the first documentation of viviparity in a terrestrial fossil reptile, and
extending the temporal distribution of the trait in squamates by at least 30 Ma. The Early Cretaceous
Jehol lizards also include the first record of long-ribbed gliding in squamates(Xianglong) and the earliest
representative (Dalinghosaurus) of the lineage leading to the living Chinese Crocodile-lizard Shinisaurus.



Waples, Robin (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service); Douglas, Marlis (University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AR, United States)

Pacific Salmon Symposium: Introduction and key questions to ponder

Salmonids have complex life histories and are prime examples of adaptive radiation and accelerated
evolution. It is also well documented that salmonids can exhibit phenotypic plasticity, whereby the same
genotype produces different phenotypes in different environments. This pattern of differential phenotypic
expression in different environments defines the norm of reaction for an individual or a population. In this
symposium, we go beyond merely documenting plasticity; instead, we use the past as a lens through
which to consider the future of these species and ask what plasticity means for conservation,
management, and persistence in a rapidly changing world. Special emphasis will be placed on how
plasticity can shape evolutionary trajectories that currently clash with anthropogenic activities. Key
questions the speakers will be asked to ponder include: (1) What are the limits to salmon plasticity? (2)
How fast can reaction norms evolve? Will adaptive plasticity of salmon be largely constrained to moving
along an existing reaction norm, or can populations evolve new (potentially more adaptive) norms of
reaction within time frames of decades to a century? (3) Can plasticity allow salmon to persist in human-
altered environments long enough to evolve new adaptations? (4) What is the relationship between
phenotypic plasticity and evolutionary plasticity (capacity for rapid evolution) in salmon? (5) For species
like salmon (and birds) that migrate between different environments, adaptive plasticity requires high cue
reliability (e.g., freshwater cues that trigger smolt migration must reliably predict optimal times to enter the
ocean). What effects will climate change have on cue reliability and adaptive plasticity? (6) What new
insights into plasticity can be provided by emerging tools like genomics? (7) How important are
epigenetics and trans-generational phenotypic plasticity?



Warkentin, Karen (Boston University);

Environmentally cued hatching: Integrative and evolutionary biology of a critical life-stage
transition

At hatching, animals trade the protection and constraints of the egg for new opportunities and dangers.
Optimal hatching timing varies with conditions in the egg and posthatching environments and a great
diversity of animals – from flatworms to mammals, including many fishes, amphibians, and reptiles – alter
hatching timing or stage accordingly. Embryos can hatch early to escape from egg predators or
pathogens or delay hatching in response to larval predators; some do both. Some embryos on land wait
for flooding to hatch, and embryos above water can hatch early from drying eggs. Parents can induce or
cue hatching, and embryos alter hatching timing in response to the quality of parental care. Hatching may
also be timed to match favorable periods in environmental cycles. The breadth and depth of
environmentally cued hatching (ECH) is currently better understood in amphibians than any other major
clade. In at least 12 families of frogs and salamanders, with diverse reproductive modes, embryos alter



                                                                                                            764
hatching timing in response to abiotic or biotic conditions affecting egg or larval mortality. Some shared
ancestral mechanisms likely underlie embryos' capacity to sense their environment and alter hatching
timing, but similar cued hatching responses appear to have evolved convergently in multiple lineages. I
will review the ecological and phylogenetic diversity of ECH across amphibians and consider the
integrative biology of red-eyed treefrog embryos as an exemplar. Red-eyed treefrogs hatch up to 30%
early to escape from egg-eating snakes and wasps, pathogenic fungus, flooding, and egg dehydration.
Early hatchlings suffer higher predation by multiple aquatic predators, and safe embryos typically delay
hatching substantially past the onset of hatching competence. I will discuss physiological mechanisms
that extend the facultative embryonic period, how embryos assess risk and decide when to hatch, and the
hatching process that enables embryos to escape in seconds if attacked. In many animals, eggs and
early hatchlings suffer high mortality, creating opportunities for strong natural selection, but their lives are
relatively simple compared to adults. Embryos clearly respond to environmental cues and conditions, and
some show surprisingly complex discrimination. The study of hatching offers excellent opportunities for
integrative and comparative research on a critical transition point in animal lives.



Warner, Daniel (Iowa State University); Harrison, Alexis (Harvard Univesity, Cambridge, MA, United
States); Reedy, Aaron (Thomas Kelly High School, Chicago, IL, United States)

Spatial and temporal variation in phenotypic selection after experimental introduction in the lizard
Anolis sagrei

Variation in environmental and demographic conditions can influence the strength and form of natural
selection. However, how this variation affects selection and population establishment immediately after
initial introduction to novel environments is poorly understood. To address this issue, we performed a
large-scale manipulative study on island populations of the invasive brown anole ( Anolis sagrei ) in
Florida. We founded nine experimental populations and manipulated the adult sex ratios on each island in
order increase the level of intra-sexual competition. Subsequent mark-recapture studies enabled us to
quantify survival and assess the strength and form of viability selection over the first reproductive season
after experimental introduction. Our results reveal substantial spatial variation in adult survival and
reproduction across islands. The strength of selection operating on body size also varied spatially and
differed between males and females, but was not always consistent among replicate populations. Spatial
variation in selection was not due to island size, but may have been associated with habitat differences
among islands. Our on-going research will assess phenotypic selection during the post-reproductive
season and viability selection on second-generation hatchling/juvenile phenotypes to enable robust
evaluation of spatio-temporal variation in, and ontogenetic shifts in the targets of, natural selection.



Warner, Jason R. (California State University, Northridge); Sanabria, Eduardo A. (Universidad Nacional
de Cuyo, Canada); Quiroga, Lorena B. (Universidad Nacional de San Juan, Canada); Espinoza, Robert
E. (California State University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Getting' High and Chillin': Cold Hardiness of Liolaemus Lizards Living Along an Elevation
Gradient

Reptiles inhabiting cold-climates have evolved strategies to survive freezing temperatures. However,
cold-hardiness adaptations have been studied in very few reptile species and no study has investigated
cold-hardiness in a lineage that is distributed over an elevational gradient. We are studying the evolution
of cold hardiness strategies of Liolaemus lizards living along an elevational gradient (1650–4070 m) in




                                                                                                            765
Argentina. Species were selected to represent multiple independent invasions of high-elevation living. We
hypothesized that high-elevation (&gt;3000 m) species will have either retained or evolved greater
capacities to supercool and tolerate freezing in comparison to their low-elevation relatives. We tested the
supercooling and freeze-tolerance capacities of six species of Liolaemus by cooling them below 0° C at
an ecologically relevant rate. The extent that a lizard was able to supercool was determined as the
temperature immediately before a dramatic rise in temperature is observed, as heat is liberated during the
formation of ice. Freeze-tolerance capacities were determined by inoculating bodily ice formation near 0°
C, then freezing the lizards to the lowest temperature recorded from their habitats. Estimates of the
susceptibility of each species to freeze were determined by recording the temperature at which ice
inoculation occurs. Lizards were then subjected to the minimum temperature for one of eight time
treatments (15–180 min), then thawed and checked for survival. Percent ice composition was determined
by calorimetry and related to survivorship. Data analyzed to date indicate that two of the high-elevation
species and some individuals of the others can survive subzero body temperatures via supercooling and
others are freeze tolerant. Analyses of data collected in summer 2012 will allow more thorough tests of
our hypotheses.



Warth, Peter (University of Tuebingen); Konstantinidis, Peter (University of Jena/Virginia Institute of
Marine Sciences, Canada); Moritz, Timo (Deutsches Meeresmuseum Stralsund, Canada)

Comparative Ontogeny of the Caudal Skeleton in Otomorpha

Despite recent advances in teleostean phylogeny there is still much work to be done regarding the
solution of basal nodes. One grouping that was repeatedly obtained by phylogenetic investigations is the
sistergroup relationship of Clupeomorpha and Ostariophysi, a clade named Otomorpha or
Ostarioclupeomorpha. The support is mainly based on mitochondrial data and the latest molecular
studies place alepocephaloids within Otomorpha. But also possible shared morphological characters,
uniting Ostariophysi and Clupeomorpha, have been proposed. One of them is the presence of the
pleurostyle, formed by fusion of the first uroneurals with the compound centrum, consisting of preural
centrum 1 and ural centrum 1. The presence of a pleurostyle and the connected modifications lead to an
own type of caudal skeleton, the pleurostylar type, opposed by the urostylar type. Since it is absent in
Denticeps, the most basal extant clupeomorph, and in fossil gonorynchiforms the status whether it is a
shared or a convergent character remains unclear.

In this study a comparative ontogenetic approach was conducted to test homologies of certain structures
in the caudal skeleton of otomorphs using cleared and Alizarin/Alcian double stained larval stages of
herring (Clupea harengus), twaite shad (Alosa fallax), bay anchovy (Anchoa mitchilli), zebrafish (Danio
rerio) and red piranha (Pygocentrus nattereri). For microstructural analysis histological sections of C.
harengus and D.rerio were prepared. The findings were compared with other taxa where ontogenetic
material was not available. In addition a literature research was conducted to trace the character
distribution in as many taxa as possible.



Wassersug, Richard (Dalhousie University);

Neither fish nor frog, but polliwog: Key features in the design of anural larvae

Anuran larvae have a suite of unique features that concurrently facilitate their fast aquatic growth and
rapid transformation into frogs at metamorphosis. These features make them distinctly different from all



                                                                                                       766
other aquatic vertebrates. In this keynote address, I will summarize my research from the last half century
on tadpole feeding, breathing, and swimming biomechanics. I will first review what we have learned from
high speed videography about on how tadpoles use their oral disc, labial teeth, and keratinized jaw
sheaths to both capture food in the water and air during air-breathing. I will then summarize what we have
learned from fluid mechanics modeling about the adaptive significance of the tadpole body form in
swimming. I will show how the general shape of anuran larvae, with a thin flat tail appended to a globose
head-body, allows for efficient aquatic locomotion yet rapid reconfiguration at the time of metamorphosis.
I will discuss how tadpole form and function collectively influence how tadpoles interact with aquatic
parasites. Lastly, I will end the talk by flagging outstanding questions about tadpole biology that I feel can
and should be addressed in the next decade or two.



Waters, Mark (Ohio University Eastern Campus);

Resident alien: Tadpole size selection by the exotic viperine snake (Natrix maura) from Mallorca,
Spain.

The viperine snake ( Natrix maura ) is a common semiaquatic snake native to the western Mediterranean
region. The species is not native to the Balearic Island of Mallorca and the snakes found there are
believed to have introduced about 2,000 years ago. The viperine snake is found over most of the island,
and feeds on the tadpoles of the endemic Mallorcan Midwife Toad ( Alytes muletensis ). Consequently,
viperine snake predation has been implicated in the toad‘s near extinction. A previous study observed a
bimodal-size distribution of toad tadpoles, and suggested that prey-size selectivity by viperine snakes
may be responsible. However, this suggestion was not based on direct observations of prey selection. I
tested the hypothesis that viperine snakes preferentially feed on medium sized tadpoles. Subjects were a
long-term captive sample (10 F, 9 M, mean mass = 68 g) of viperine snakes from Mallorca maintained at
Ohio University Campus. Green Frog ( Lithobates clamitans ) tadpoles were used as proxies for the
endangered toads. Twenty tadpoles from each of three size classes were placed in an artificial pool (166
cm long x 120 cm wide x 42 cm deep) in the laboratory. Snakes were allowed to forage in the pool. After
24 hours, the remaining prey were tallied to determine consumption. Viperine snakes did not eat tadpoles
in proportion to numeric availability. Mean (min-max) numbers eaten were 6 (0-17) large, 4.26 (0-12)
medium, and 0.95 (0-5) small tadpoles. The results also indicate a scaling effect, with the number of
tadpoles taken in each size class increasing with snake gape index (which itself correlates positively with
snake size). Total meal volume also increased with size/gape index. Overall, prey size selection in this
gap-limited species is similar to other snakes. I tentatively conclude that the ―missing‖ size class of
tadpoles on Mallorca is not a consequence of snake prey choice, and may be explained by Midwife Toad
phenology or demographics. Comparative data on palatability and evasiveness of Midwife Toad and
Green Frog tadpoles would refine this conclusion.



Watkins-Colwell, Gregory (Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History); Sabaj Perez, Mark (The
Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, United States); Giermakowski, Tom (Museum of
Southwestern Biology, Albuquerque, NM, United States)

Technology and Innovation in Herpetology and Ichthyology Collections: Symposium Opening
Remarks and Collection Survey Results

Specimen collections have long been important to a wide variety of studies of natural history.
Collections have always reflected changes in research techniques because they have been used as



                                                                                                          767
repositories for vouchers and additional research materials such as preserved materials, microscope
slides and molecular samples. Furthermore, advances in data management systems, from innovations
in archival paper production to computer databases, and advances in geographical information
technologies have also lead to changes in collections and collection management practices.       In a full
day symposium we will explore some of the ways that technology has changed collections and lead to
innovative ways to use collections for scientific exploration. We will also reflect upon the results of a
survey of collections that indicate areas where improvements are needed.



Watling, James (University of Florida); Doan, Tiffany; Bell, Kristen (Unaffiliated, Canada); Donnelly,
Maureen (Florida International University, Canada)

Can small samples predict relative species richness?

Counting the number of species among sampling sites is central to efforts to describe latitudinal gradients
in species richness, identify biodiversity hotspots and describe ecological responses to land-use change
and other stressors.         Because it can be difficult to conduct exhaustive biotic inventories even of
relatively conspicuous taxonomic groups, a variety of methods have been developed to compare species
richness among sites based on incomplete sampling (e.g., rarefaction) or estimate asymptotic species
richness (e.g., extrapolation). Here we use amphibian and reptile survey data from Florida, Costa Rica,
Peru, and Bolivia to show that relative species richness among sites based on small subsets of more
complete surveys correlates with total species richness observed at completion of faunal inventories.
Overall, the strongest results were obtained from Costa Rica and Bolivia, where small samples were
excellent predictors of final species richness. The accuracy with which small samples predicted final
relative species richness was robust to differences in sampling method in Costa Rica.         In Peru, small
samples of a quadrat data set were good predictors of relative species richness, but small samples from
transect data did not accurately predict total relative species richness until approximately 300 individuals
had been sampled at each site.        Seasonal effects on the ability of small data sets to predict relative
species richness among sites at the end of surveys were apparent at a site in central Florida, but not in
tropical Costa Rica or Bolivia.      Knowing the relative species richness among sites can help inform
conservation decisions based on rapid, incomplete surveys and increases the utility of small data sets for
applications in basic and applied ecology.



Waye, Heather (University of Minnesota, Morris);

Navigation and orientation in red-sided garter snakes

The mechanism by which animals find their way through a complex environment with great accuracy, and
often over long distances, is still poorly understood for many species. Visual or olfactory cues are used
by many animals for navigation or orientation, while other species rely on more specialized senses that
are able to detect polarized light or the Earth‘s magnetic field. In addition, in some vertebrate species the
magnetic sense appears to be mediated or modified by light cues. Red-sided garter snakes ( Thamnophis
sirtalis parietalis ) in the Interlake region of Manitoba, Canada, directionally migrate to overwintering
hibernacula for long distances from the marshes where they feed over the summer. This highly-specific
directional movement makes this population an ideal system for examining the senses used by snakes to
navigate. Snakes migrating towards an Interlake hibernaculum were captured and relocated to a site 28
km away, individually released into a circular arena, and their direction of travel recorded. The snakes
were then placed into one of four treatment groups (control weight on head, magnet on head, polarized



                                                                                                         768
filters over eyes, or polarized filters plus magnet) and retested. Results suggest that these snakes are
able to determine the general direction of their hibernaculum from a relatively long distance and this
ability was reduced by application of magnets and/or polarized filters. It seems likely that garter snakes,
like many other animals, are able to use a combination of cues for navigation and/or orientation.



Weaver, Robert (Department of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University);

Ecology of the Desert Nightsnake (Hypsiglena chlorophaea) in the Pacific Northwest

The night snake ( Hypsiglena chlorophaea ) is a small snake (&lt; 66 cm TL) found throughout the
western United States, from Kansas west to California, from the southwest, north to south central British
Columbia. Here I present data on the ecology and behavior H . chlorophaea gathered from over 500
specimens. Hysiglena chlorophaea is known from a wide range of habitats, from dry shrub-steppe and
oak woodland to coniferous forests and disturbed agricultural areas. The monthly activity patterns of H.
chlorophaea in the Pacific Northwest are from early March through late October. Specimens were
collected at temperatures ranging from 9‑35.5 °C. Males were collected more frequently than females
during May, but in equal numbers during June and July, while females were found in higher numbers from
August to September. Juvenile and hatchling snakes were collected from late July into September. Daily
activity patterns were from 2100 and 0600 hr. Snakes were collected more often during periods of low
moon-light (e.g. new moon) than high (e.g. full). In this region, males ranged in size from 184–402 mm
SVL (301.7 ± 5.8 mm), while females were 158–540 mm SVL (344.5 ± 69.4 mm). Body mass of males
was 2.6–22.1 g (10.2 ± 5.04 mm), and females 2.3–53.9 g (15.1 ± 9.49 mm). Throughout this region H.
chlorophaea feeds on a wide variety of prey such as scincid and anguid lizards, thamnophiine snakes,
anurans, mammals and the eggs of other squamate reptiles. The reproductive ecology differs little from
other parts of the range of H. chlorophaea . Males with enlarged testes were found from mid-May
through late August. Females with enlarged follicles and ova were found from May through June, with
recent hatchlings collected during mid-August. Based upon these data, in the Pacific Northwest, H .
chlorophaea has a more varied diet compared to southern populations, but shows a similar preference
for lizards. This species is easily one of the more abundant species in Washington State, and throughout
much of the Pacific Northwest.         Given the status of H . chlorophaea as endangered in British
Columbia, these data presented here may aid in conservation and management



Wegner, Nick (National Marine Fisheries Service); Pribyl, Alena; Hyde, John (National Marine Fisheries
Service, Canada)

Post-release survival and behavior of deep-dwelling rockfishes (genus Sebastes) suffering from
barotrauma: Using recompression devices to reduce bycatch mortality

Rockfishes (genus Sebastes ) experience high rates of catch-and-release mortality associated with
barotrauma. As these fishes are brought to the surface, gas in the gas bladder expands with the change
in ambient pressure. This causes the gas bladder to rupture and leak gas into the visceral and cranial
cavities often causing bloating, crushed organs, eversion of the esophagus, exophthalmia (bulging of the
eyes), emphysema and emboli in various organs, and excessive buoyancy. Excessive buoyancy makes
it difficult for many species to return to depth under their own power.       Discarded rockfishes are thus
often left floating on the surface where they eventually succumb to their injuries or predation. This study
assesses the ability of deep-dwelling rockfishes to recover from barotrauma-related injuries if returned to
depth using a descending device. Long-term survival and recovery of five rockfish species [sunset



                                                                                                        769
rockfish, S. crocotulus (n=12), bocaccio, S. paucispinis (n=12) , bank rockfish, S. rufus (n=12),
cowcod, S. levis (n=9), and starry rockfish, S. constellatus (n=3 )] were monitored with VEMCO V9AP
accelerometer and pressure sensing acoustic transmitters within an acoustic receiver array.        Rockfish
survival and movement patterns will be discussed in relation to fishing regulations and potential measures
to reduce bycatch mortality.



Wehrle, Beck (California State University, Northridge); Espinoza, Robert (California State University,
Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Why do lizards lounge? The role of social aggregations in exchanging microbial communities
among hatchling Iguana iguana

Researchers first attempted to identify the sources of the gut microbes harbored by herbivorous reptiles
&gt;30 years ago. These endosymbionts are needed to digest plant fiber and their fermentation products
can contribute substantially to their host‘s energy budget, yet this symbiosis is poorly understood. Iguana
iguana are herbivorous throughout life, yet emerge from their eggs with sterile guts. How do they acquire
their gut microflora? Although rare in lizards, social interactions are a hypothesized route of microbe
transfer via direct contact and/or eating feces of older conspecifics or previously inoculated peers. Why
sociality evolves is poorly understood, but both biotic and abiotic factors have been implicated. Sociality
may have evolved in some herbivorous reptiles (such as Iguana iguana ) to foster the transfer of gut
microbes. Early attempts to characterize this microbial community in hatchling iguanas provided crude
assessments of bacterial turnover. Our study is the first to characterize the spatial, temporal, and social
variation of these vital microbial communities using modern genomic techniques. We hypothesized that
microbial communities will be more similar within than between sites, increase in diversity over time, and
will vary with groups size and proximity. We observed and individually marked juvenile, subadult, and
adult iguanas alone and in social lounges at 11 sites on and around Barro Colorado Island, Panamá over
two hatching seasons . Of the 540 focal observations of hatchlings, 38% were of social aggregations
(mean = 2.9 lizards/group). Only 3.5% of social groups contained hatchlings and subadults/adults.
Hatchlings in groups averaged 1.2 m from their nearest neighbor (range = 0–6 m), although site densities
varied. We collected microbe samples from the hindguts of iguanas over the first 60 days posthatching.
One hundred samples were selected for analyses, chosen to represent sites, age classes, varying social
group sizes, and individuals resampled over time. Microbe-specific DNA was isolated from fecal samples
and the 16S rDNA region was pyrosequenced to characterize the gut microbe communities of iguanas
over space, time, and with respect to observed social interactions. These analyses are underway. We
predict that microbial communities will be most similar among proximate hatchlings, will exhibit higher
diversity in hatchlings from larger lounges, and will increase in total diversity over time.




                                                                                                       770
Weideli, Ornella (University of Basel); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station, Miami, FL, United
States); Stump, Kristine (University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, United States); Feldheim, Kevin (The Field Museum, Chicago, IL, United
States); Salzburger, Walter (University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland)

Has resort related large-scale mangrove habitat destruction resulted in a change of the prey
community and therefore in a dietary shift of nursery bound juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion
brevirostris (a BACI study)?

Non-lethal eversion for collecting and sampling shark stomach contents is a common method used in
dietary studies. By also sampling available prey communities, the overlap between observed diet and
prey availability can be investigated. Recent studies have shown that sharks are capable of foraging as
selective predators, not simply feeding on the most available prey, which makes dietary studies more
interesting and complex. The waters around Bimini, Bahamas (25˚44‘N, 79˚16‘W) provide an ideal
nursery location for juvenile lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris). The near-shore nursery areas offer
large seagrass beds fringed by mangroves, a favorable habitat for a large number of subtropical coastal
organisms such as teleosts (e.g. juvenile reef fish) and small invertebrates. However, large scale
development has resulted in the removal of shoreline mangroves (up to 50 %) and dredging of seagrass
beds (~750,000 m3). This has led to a drastic habitat alteration in one of the main lemon shark nurseries.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether this anthropogenic habitat alteration has led to a change
in the diet of nursery-bound juvenile lemon sharks. Samples were collected in both the impacted nursery
and a nearby but undisturbed control nursery prior and post development, making it possible to conduct a
Before-After, Control-Impact (BACI) study. The current dataset originates from two different time periods:
before (year 2000-2003) and after the development (year 2010-2011). The former data collection is pre-
development, and the later as a post-development subsample of the original dataset. Post-development
samples obtained for this study consist of 111 full and 90 empty stomachs and a prey community
collection of 9,920 individuals (teleosts and invertebrates) weighting 152,694 grams. Prey community and
stomach contents of both sampling periods were identified to the lowest taxonomic level, both visually
and through DNA sequencing, and were then grouped into families, enabling the comparison of post- and
pre-development data using an index of relative importance (%IRI). Dietary analyses of prey groups
revealed in both studies that teleosts dominated the diet by number, weight and occurrence, followed by
crustaceans as the most important invertebrate prey group. Results indicate that post-development,
juvenile lemon sharks were feeding from lower number of available prey species with an increased level
of scavenging from anthropogenic sources.



Weigmann, Simon (Zoological Museum Hamburg); Stehmann, Matthias (ICHTHYS - Ichthyological
Research Laboratory and Consultancy, Hamburg, Germany); Thiel, Ralf (Zoological Museum Hamburg,
Hamburg, Germany)

Okamejei n. sp., a new deep-water skate (Elasmobranchii, Rajidae) from the northwestern Indian
Ocean off Sokotra Islands, with comments on congeners in the area

A new species of the Indo-Pacific skate genus Okamejei will be presented from around the Socotra
Islands and the slope off northeastern Africa. The 10 specimens of the new species were sampled aboard
the Russian RV ‗Vityaz‘. As is typical for the genus all specimens have dark ventral pores, a relatively
long, slender tail, a wide interdorsal space, and a long postdorsal tail section. The new species differs
from its congeners in having a unique rosette-like dorsal pattern of numerous dark brown spots. The
dorsal ground color is ocher, but the anterior snout is dusky. Compared to its sympatric congeners the
new species for example has a shorter preorbital snout length, an intermediate distance between first gill



                                                                                                       771
slits, a greater orbit diameter, an intermediate number of upper jaw tooth rows and less pectoral radials.
Furthermore, comments on the questionable record of the Okamejei pita holotype from the very inner
Persian Gulf at the estuary off Iraq and its taxonomic status will be given. Additionally, a brief overview of
some other new taxa from the so-called ‗Vityaz‘ collection will be given. This collection, which became
property of the Zoological Museum Hamburg in the 1990s, is a very rich collection of the diverse but
largely unknown deepwater chondrichthyan fauna in the western Indian Ocean. Geographically, this
deepwater survey ranged from the Gulf of Aden to the southern end of the Madagascar Ridge at Walters
Shoal. It included remote and largely unknown localities, such as around the Socotra Islands, the slope
off Somalia and Kenya, the deep southern Mozambique Channel, the Madagascar Ridge and the Saya
de Malha Bank. Quite a number of new taxa of deepwater sharks, skates and rays, and holocephalans
have been discovered, along with first geographical records of many taxa in partly large series.



Weir, Scott (Texas Tech University); Yu, Shuangying; Suski, Jamie (Texas Tech University, Canada);
Talent, Larry (Oklahoma State University, Canada); Salice, Christopher (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Terrestrial reptile ecotoxicology: recent trends and future directions

Reptiles have been identified as an underrepresented taxon in the field of ecotoxicology and the effects of
contaminants on reptiles are still largely unknown. We summarize recent research in terrestrial reptile
ecotoxicology focusing on acute and sublethal effects of contaminants. Few published studies of acute
contaminant toxicity to reptiles were found in the last 10 years. Much like adult amphibians, the acute
effects of contaminants (especially pesticides) are relatively unknown in terrestrial reptiles. Investigations
of sublethal effects of contaminants on reptiles include behavior, energetics, endocrine signaling
pathways, reproduction, and developmental effects; however, relatively few studies have been published
relative to other taxa. With so little data available, no sublethal endpoint has emerged as particularly
useful for reptile ecotoxicological investigations. To place reptile ecotoxicity in a broader context,
sensitivity of reptiles to toxicants was compared to sensitivity of other terrestrial vertebrates. Despite
widespread belief that reptiles are ―tough‖ and generally tolerant to chemical contamination, in many
cases (5 out of 15 chemicals) reptiles were more sensitive than birds. This was especially true for
emerging insecticides such as natural pyrethrins and their derivative synthetic pyrethroid insecticides. For
assessments of ecological risk based on exposure models and toxicity data, reptiles can have much
greater risk to contaminants than birds, despite greater dietary exposure in birds. In some cases,
ecological risk is very high for reptiles suggesting that some currently used insecticides should be
reconsidered for potential adverse effects to terrestrial reptiles relative to birds. In an effort to better
characterize and direct ecotoxicological research activities, we examined several reptile population
models to determine which stages are most important to the life cycle, and thus, may have the strongest
population-level effect if altered by contaminants. Preliminary investigation of life cycle data and
population models suggests that survival of the juvenile stage is very important for terrestrial squamates.
Future contaminant studies on reptiles (specifically acute and short term sublethal experiments) should
perhaps use juveniles as they are likely to be the most demographically important life stage. This review
pointed to glaring data gaps including a general lack of information on contaminant effects on reptiles in a
larger community context. While amphibian toxicology has grown in recent years with the use of
simulated aquatic communities (mesocosms) no such efforts have been made for reptiles. As an
example, there is limited understanding of contaminant-induced alterations on reptiles and their
interactions with other terrestrial species. Simulated terrestrial enclosures would improve our
understanding of how contaminant effects may manifest in terrestrial communities. Lastly, we stress the
need for additional ecotoxicological studies that would improve risk estimates for reptiles, a necessary
step in order to inform conservation and/or management strategies at polluted sites.



                                                                                                          772
Weitzman, Chava (University of Nevada, Reno); Sandmeier, Fran; Nieto, Nathan; Tracy, C. Richard
(University of Nevada, Reno, Canada)

Mycoplasma Across the Range: Presence and Relationships of Disease-Causing Bacteria in the
Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii)

The desert tortoise, Gopherus agassizii , is listed under the Endangered Species Act, partly due to an
upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) that has been detected throughout the Mojave Desert. URTD can
be caused by the mollicute bacterium Mycoplasma agassizii , and severe cases are thought to result in
lethargy and high mortality rates. The importance of this disease as an extinction threat continues to be
unknown and controversial. Thus, understanding the prevalence of Mycoplasma across the range is
extremely important. However, with both enzootic and epizootic infections present in tortoise populations,
we need to know if there are differences among those bacteria found in tortoise populations more
prominently affected by disease compared with those with low disease levels. We use nasal lavage to
collect mucous from the upper respiratory tract, and we have sampled tortoises from across the range in
geographically distinct areas (valleys) in California, Nevada, and Utah. Using M. agassizii -specific DNA
sequences as an indicator for presence of the bacterium in an individual, we have mapped spatially
explicit pathogen occurrences. Insight into evolutionary relationships among M. agassizii across the
landscape derives from gene trees based upon 500 bp sequences of the 16S-rDNA. The variation we
have found in this locus allows for comparisons of bacterial types and presence of disease signs in
individuals and regions.           This work continues as we have added two additional DNA loci for
sequencing to be used in phylogenetic analyses. We are also testing blood plasma for presence of
infection in the tortoises, and expanding this research to determine the presence of Mycoplasma in the
nares of all of the North American species of the genus Gopherus .



Welch, Mark (Mississippi State University); Rasberry, Armed (Mississippi State University, Canada);
Grant, Tandora (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, Escondido, United States); Van
Veen, Rick (University of the West Indies, Canada); Robinson, Orlando (Hope Zoo, Kingston, Canada);
Wilson, Byron (University of the West Indies, Canada)

Assessing the genetic impact of headstarting on the Jamaican Iguana (Cyclura collei) in the
Hellshire Hills

Since the 1990 rediscovery of Cyclura collei in Jamaica‘s Hellshire Hills, hatchlings have been collected
for headstarting at the Hope Zoo in Kingston. Animals were first released from the headstart program in
1996. This program has been extraordinarily successful. It appears to have reversed the trend of
declining population size. However, the collection of hatchlings for the headstart program may have
favored offspring from a limited sample of the breeding population. We have assessed this potential using
six polymorphic microsatellites originally designed for congeners of C. collei . Our findings suggest that a
significant amount of genetic variation, 13%, that was present at the onset of the headstart program is
absent from recent cohorts of hatchlings, and that allele frequencies in recent cohorts are far more similar
to those of animals caught in the immediate vicinity of the known nesting sites. This finding suggests that
headstarting has effectively increased the reproductive success of relatively few individuals. It may also
indicate that some genetic variation in early cohorts was derived from animals living outside the core
area. Since these are long-lived animals, genetic loss may be mitigated or reversed by targeting animals
with rare genotypes as genetic stock for future headstart generations.




                                                                                                        773
Weldon, Ché (School of Environmental Sciences and Development, North-West University); Botha,
Vidette; Taylor, Jonathan (North-West University, Canada)

The use of the South African Diatom Index in conservation management of Hewitt¿s Ghost frog

The critically endangered Heleophryne hewitti (Hewitt‘s Ghost Frog) is only found in four streams of the
Elandsberg Mountains, Eastern Cape. The species entire habitat is restricted to the bounds of the
Mountain to Ocean (MTO) forestry area. This study focuses on three areas within this habitat, each
differing in shade coverage due to the density of pine trees in the riparian zone. Diatoms have value as
water quality indicators, which qualify them for use in conservation management. In addition diatoms
comprise a large part of tadpole diet, thus providing information about the ecology of amphibians. The
aim of the project was to determine the impact of water quality and shading on the distribution of
diatoms. A survey for adult H. hewitti frogs was conducted during breeding and non-breeding seasons,
i n order to provide forestry with the information needed to make informed decisions regarding the future
wellbeing of H. hewitti . Initial results indicate that samples from riverine substrate and tadpole gut
content samples differ in terms of diatom species composition, which could be attributed to tadpole
grazing strategy. Cell deformities in diatom species suggest the possible presence of environmental
toxins.



Welsh, Hartwell (USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station);

Frogs, fish and forestry: an integrated watershed network paradigm conserve biodiversity and
ecological services

I review research on the distributions of amphibians in whole stream networks in the temperate
rainforests of Northwest California, documenting dependence on key stream attributes, and examining
linkages between attribute states and natural and anthropogenic disturbance processes. I explore the
implications of these relationships for other elements of native biological diversity such as salmonids. I
compare riparian management guidelines from the U. S. federal Northwest Forest Plan with those of
three Pacific Northwest states, and discuss the fluvial and geomorphologic process domains of stream
networks as they relate to these guidelines. Focusing on headwater (1st to 3rd order) channels, I review
evidence for the effectiveness of current riparian management to maintain viable populations of native
headwater amphibians. Using examples from studies of the environmental relationships of these
amphibians, I evidence the ineffectiveness of current riparian rules to protect critical ecological processes
in headwater environments. I examine three key stream attributes that are poorly protected by current
rules, and document the responses of resident amphibians to anthropogenically altered attribute states.
Combining the concepts of process domains, the stream continuum, and dendritic networks, I examine
the status of biota in headwater reaches, and the implications for downstream e biota like salmonids, all
of whom depend on attributes and conditions that result from the inherent linkages among the parts of
these stream networks. This analysis indicates that to recover and maintain sensitive species at both
upper and lower extremes, and throughout stream networks, will require recognizing and applying the
concept of hydrologic connectivity. This concept can guide management of stream networks to protect all
the parts and the interconnecting processes required to maintain catchment-wide ecological integrity.
This paradigm has important im plications for stream networks worldwide.




                                                                                                         774
Welton, Luke (University of Kansas); Siler, Cameron (University of Kansas, Canada); Diesmos, Arvin
(National Museum of the Philippines, Canada); Brown, Rafe (University of Kansas, Canada)

Multilocus Phylogeny and Bayesian Estimates of Species Boundaries Reveal Hidden Evolutionary
Relationships and Cryptic Diversity in Southeast Asian Water Monitors (genus Varanus)

 Recent advances in conceptual, numerical, and methodological approaches in phylogenetic systematics
have enabled increasingly robust approaches to the question of species delimitation in empirical studies
of biodiversity.     As the diversity of lines of evidence available to systematists has increased,
theinferential power of species delimitation methods has also expanded. Here we showcase a model
system in a data-rich, comparative approach to evaluating methods of species delimitation among the
abundant and conspicuous monitor lizards ( Varanus ).            The water monitors ( Varanus salvator
Complex), a widespread lineage distributed throughout Southeast Asia and southern India, have been the
subjects of numerous taxonomic treatments, drawing particular attention to the possibilityof
undocumented species diversity in the Philippines. Despite these taxonomic changes reliance on
purportedly diagnostic differences in morphological characters, no attention has been given to the genetic
underpinnings of currently recognized species diversity in Philippine water monitors. We collected a 5-
gene dataset, estimated the phylogeny of the Varanus salvator Complex, and inferred species
boundaries using a Bayesian coalescent approach. Our results contradict previous systematic and
taxonomic hypotheses and reveal surprising affinities between Philippine and non-Philippine lineages.
We reject previous traditional taxonomic treatments, and simultaneously uncover levels of cryptic diversity
never alluded to in past studies.    In general, our results suggest that a combination of both phenotypic
and genetic data will be most informative to taxonomists, systematists, and biodiversity specialists when
attempting to estimate species diversity. We advocate the use of multilocus datasets for testing the
validity of recognized evolutionary lineages and estimating species boundaries, and recommend
reserving taxonomic changes for cases in which multiple lines of evidence, namely molecular and
morphological, agree.



Wenbo, Wang (Institute of Bio-inspired Structure and Surface Engineering); Yezhong, Tang (Chengdu
Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, Canada); Hao, Lei (Wuhan
Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China., China); Xuxia,
Wang (Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.,
Canada); Zhendong, Liu (Institute of Bio-inspired Structure and Surface Engineering, Nanjing,China,
Canada); Carr, Catherine E. (University of Maryland at College Park, Maryland, United States);
Zhendong, Dai (Institute of Bio-inspired Structure and Surface Engineering, Nanjing,China, China)

Auditory Brainstem and Midbrain in Tokay Gecko Visualized by Manganese-enhanced Magnetic
Resonance Imaging

Geckos use vocal communication in social interactions with other geckos. Furthermore, gecko ears are
highly directional, with middle ears connected through the mouth cavity (Christensen-Dalsgaard &amp;
Manley, 2005). We have used manganese-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging to reveal the auditory
nuclei in brainstem and midbrain in live animals, after injection of manganese into the torus semicircularis.
Manganese labeled the nucleus magnocellularis (NM) in the dorsomedial caudal medulla. The nucleus
laminaris (NL) was located beneath the rostral part of NM. A nucleus lateral to caudal NM was also
visualized and potentially associated with the auditory system, since it was also imaged by the 2-
Deoxyglucose method. A large nucleus angularus (NA) was located rostral to NM/NL. Two clearly
separated nuclei of the superior olive were shown at ventrolateral area of the medulla, and the nucleus of
the lateral lemniscus was located on the lateral wall of the pons. The torus semicircularis was fused in the




                                                                                                         775
dorsal midline caudally, then split into two parts that decreased in size rostrally. These results were
consistent with results of our previous studies using immunohistochemistry, neurophysiology, 2-DG and
track tracing and suggested that auditory pathways are conserved among reptilians.



Weng, Kevin (Pelagic Fisheries Research Program, U of Hawaii); Comfort, Christina (University of
Hawaii, Canada)

Habitat of a globally distributed deep water shark, Hexanchus griseus, in Hawaii

Demersal and deepwater sharks have received less attention than high profile epipelagic species,
although their overlap with fisheries and high vulnerability to overexploitation makes them high priority
species for research and conservation. Hexanchus griseus may be a top predator on most of the world‘s
continental shelves and slopes, but we have limited understanding of its biology. It is found from the
equator to boreal zones, and from near the surface to almost 2000 m, deepening its habitat towards the
equator. In Hawaii the species has been observed from submersibles and with baited cameras, and
captured across a range of sizes from juvenile to adult. Conventional and satellite tagging reveals that H.
griseus typically has high residency but makes occasional long distance movements. Foraging behavior
is dominated by strong diel vertical migrations that bring the species up to 200 m at night, potentially into
contact with deep reef and epipelagic species.



Werneck, Fernanda (Brigham Young University); Gamble, Tony (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minneapolis, MN, United States); Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brazil);
Rodrigues, Miguel (Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil); Sites Jr., Jack (Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT, United States)

Lizard diversification in the South American               dry diagonal:      integrating   continent-wide
phylogeography and distribution modeling

The relative influence of Neogene geomorphological events and Quaternary climatic changes as causal
mechanisms on Neotropical diversification remains largely speculative, as most divergence timing
inferences are based on a single-locus and have limited taxonomic or geographic sampling. To
investigate these influences, we use a multilocus (2 mitochondrial and 11 nuclear genes) range-wide
sampling of Phyllopezus pollicaris, a gecko complex widely distributed across the poorly studied South
American ‗dry diagonal‘ biomes. Our approach couples traditional and model-based phylogeography with
geospatial methods, and demonstrates Miocene diversification and limited influence of Pleistocene
climatic fluctuations on P. pollicaris. Phylogeographic structure and distribution models highlight that
persistence across multiple isolated regions shaped the diversification of this species complex.
Approximate Bayesian computation supports hypotheses of allopatric and ecological/sympatric speciation
between lineages that largely coincide with genetic clusters associated with Chaco, Cerrado, and
Caatinga, standing for complex diversification between the ‗dry diagonal‘ biomes. We recover extremely
high genetic diversity and suggest that eight well-supported clades may be valid species, with direct
implications for taxonomy and conservation assessments. These patterns exemplify how adequate
sampling of low-vagility species complexes, characterized by strong genetic structure and pre-
Pleistocene divergence histories represent ideal radiations to investigate broad biogeographic histories of
associated biomes.




                                                                                                         776
Werner, Philine (Trier University); Lötters, Stefan (Trier University, Trier, Germany); Schmidt, Benedikt
R. (KARCH, Neuchâtel, Switzerland); Engler, Jan O. (Trier University, Trier, Germany); Rödder, Dennis
(Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germany)

The role of climate for the range limits of parapatric European land salamanders

The study of ecological and evolutionary factors that determine species distributions is essential when
trying to understand the maintenance of abrupt range limits in parapatric species. Such abrupt range
limits can be related to changes in climatic conditions along a strong environmental gradient or to
dispersal limitations due to biotic interactions e.g. interspecific competition. The European land
salamanders, Salamandra salamandra and S. atra , are parapatric but exhibit small contact zones.
Since the cause of this pattern and the restricted range of S. atra are poorly understood, we studied the
role of climate in the sharp range delimitation between the two species. This study combines recent
approaches in species distribution modeling and univariate and multivariate techniques in order to
compare the species‘ climatic tolerances and their realized niches in the available environmental space to
determine whether their ranges are limited by climatic conditions or by other factors. The analysis was
repeated for three contact zones in Switzerland to assess possible geographic variation. The results show
that the species occur at locations with different climatic characteristics along with the identification of a
strong climatic gradient across the species‘ range limits. Although the species‘ realized niches differ
moderately, interspecific niche overlap is found. The wide climatic tolerance range of S. atra suggests
that alternative factors contribute to the restriction of its geographic range. For all approaches, the results
showed a similar pattern but also confirmed variation in the climatic niche among the contact zones. The
change in climatic conditions along the recognized gradient within contact zones may represent a major
determining factor for species‘ range limits. However, detailed studies of geographic variation in
environmental conditions and climatic niches imply that interspecific interactions may also be range-
determining.



Werning, Sarah (University of California Berkeley); McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
Canada)

A phylogeographic study reveals cryptic genetic diversity in sunbeam snakes (Xenopeltis)

Sunbeam snakes (Xenopeltidae: Xenopeltis ) are semifossorial animals well-known for their highly
iridescent scales. Two species comprise the family; X. hainanensis (found only in southeastern China
and northern Vietnam), and X. unicolor (which occurs across most of southeast Asia). Despite its broad
distribution and good representation in museum collections, genetic variation in Xenopeltis has not been
examined. To date, the species status of X. hainanensis has not been confirmed by molecular studies,
and the level of genetic diversity in X. unicolor remains unknown. This is unfortunate because an
understanding of the genetic structure (or lack thereof) within Xenopeltis would inform questions about
the timing and pace of its expansion across southeast Asia, as well as the possibility of overlooked
species diversity in this basal snake family. We sequenced over 80 individuals of X. unicolor and X.
hainanensis for three genetic markers. Our sample includes specimens from across the generic range,
representing all major areas where it occurs, and including areas in which both species occur in
sympatry. We found that the two species are highly genetically divergent despite morphological similarity.
Additionally, we found evidence of cryptic diversity within X. unicolor , which is comprised of several
divergent clades. We discuss the geographic distribution of these clades and their implications for the
phylogeographic history of the taxon.




                                                                                                           777
Westley, Peter (University of Washington); Fleming, Ian (University of Washington, Canada)

Adaptive phenotypic plasticity and the successful invasion of novel environments by non-native
brown trout

Phenotypic plasticity – the ability of an organism to respond to an environmental stimulus with a change
in state, form, movement, or behaviour – is increasingly thought to represent a mechanism for
populations and species to cope with abruptly changing environmental conditions. Over a hundred years
ago, J. M. Baldwin proposed a ‗new factor‘ in evolution whereby plasticity could facilitate survival in new
environments and allow selection to act on the survivors in the direction of the plastic response. These
predictions encapsulate the first vital stages of the ‗Baldwin effect‘; however, few studies have attempted
to empirically test these predictions in nature. In this talk I report on the results of a combined common-
garden and reciprocal- transplant experiment along with formal quantifications of natural selection to test
the hypotheses that phenotypic plasticity acting on functional morphology in juvenile brown trout (Salmo
trutta) should allow individuals to persist when introduced to novel environments and that plasticity should
be predictable based on patterns of natural selection. To do so, we raised individuals from three
populations in common laboratory conditions until large enough to tag and track in the wild. We detected
marked plasticity in swimming morphology, specifically the depth of the head and body, after
approximately two months of rearing in three wild streams. Populations that survived introduction were
generally consistent in their plastic responses, though we did detect evidence of population-specific
plasticity suggesting underlying genetic variation. Counter to predictions, the plasticity we observed was
frequently in the opposite direction from selection even though it moved in a direction generally assumed
to be adaptive (i.e. small rivers seemed to plastically induce shallow-bodies and vice versa in large
rivers). We did detect evidence of greater survival and growth of individuals reared in their local
environments compared to when reared in foreign locations, suggesting local adaptation has evolved in
these populations recently descended from common ancestors. Overall, our results suggest that plasticity
may shape phenotypes in unpredictable ways and that attempts to forecast the response of populations
to rapidly changing global environments may be prone to failure.



Westphal, Michael (Bureau of Land Management); Davis-Rabosky, Alison (University of California,
Berkeley, Canada); Johnson, Paul (National Park Service, Canada)

Patchy in Panoche: Genetic subdivision in a disjunct northern population of the desert night
lizard, Xantusia vigils.

 The effect of global climate change on within-population genetic structure is a growing topic of interest.
Increased fragmentation and reductions in genetic diversity are predicted responses to climate change.
Populations at latitudinal boundaries can provide clues to the outcome of historical range expansion and
restriction and thus may be useful models for the future effects of climate change. We studied genetic
subdivision in the desert night lizard, Xantusia vigilis , in the Panoche Hills of west Fresno County,
California.      The Panoche Hills population is a disjunct northern outpost of the species, which is
otherwise widely distributed throughout the desert Southwest.      Night lizards in the Panoche Hills and
adjacent hill ranges appear to be restricted to small, isolated yucca patches, suggesting that
fragmentation might have occurred within the population.          We analyzed a suite of well-behaved
microsatellite loci to estimate measures of genetic subdivision among subpopulations and found
significant restriction in gene flow among yucca patches on a very small geographic scale. Given that
this population is already highly fragmented it seems unlikely that it can function as a source population
for a northward expansion in the face of a rapid warming trend.          Long-term monitoring of genetic




                                                                                                        778
subdivision and allelic diversity in Panoche night lizards could provide a glimpse into trends of genetic
response to global climate change.



Wetherbee, Bradley (University of Rhode Island/Guy Harvey Research Institute); Harvey, Guy (Guy
Harvey Research Institute, Canada); Burnie, Neil (Bermuda Shark Project, Hamilton, United Kingdom);
Aming, Choy (Bermuda Shark Project, Canada); Byrne, Mike (University of Georgia, Canada); Shivji,
Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research Institute, Canada)

Contrary to ordinary - long-term movements of tiger sharks reveal both variable and consistent
movements

Tracking of 58 tiger sharks ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) in the Western Atlantic, Caribbean and Australia using
satellite transmitters has revealed that their movements are highly variable among locations and
individual sharks. Sharks tracked in Bermuda demonstrate the most consistent behaviors characterized
by seasonal north-south migrations although movements among sharks vary. Bermuda tagged sharks
show an impressive ability to utilize two very different marine ecosystems for nearly equal periods of time,
spending warmer months in the open ocean covering long distances, in contrast to winter months
primarily concentrated in coastal waters of The Bahamas. Individual sharks tracked for extensive periods
of time (&lt; 1 yr) exhibited remarkable consistency of movement between years, following similar
migratory pathways and occupying similar seasonal areas. Areas searched intensively by sharks in
oceanic waters were an order of magnitude larger than areas searched intensively in insular waters.
Long-term tracking of tiger sharks has illustrated a combination of both behavioral plasticity and
consistency resulting in connectivity of disparate and distant marine ecosystems on multiple scales.



White, Easton (Arizona State University); Nagy, John (Scottsdale Community College, Arizona State
University, Canada); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station, Canada)

A stage-structured stochastic model of lemon shark population dynamics

While some general mathematical models of shark population dynamics have been important in fisheries
management, there is a need for more detailed treatments to assess causes of population fluctuations.
For example, nursery sites are an important habitat element for juvenile lemon sharks ( Negaprion
brevirostris ), exposing this species to potential anthropogenic impacts not faced by pelagic species.
However, nursery site use has been largely overlooked in mathematical population models. Here we
define a novel stage-structured, Markov chain stochastic model to study how this life history characteristic
interacts with demographic stochasticity to generate fluctuations in lemon shark populations. We show
that demographic stochasticity accounts for 27 to 40% of the variance observed in a 17-year,
longitudinally studied population of lemon sharks. We therefore, conclude that unmodeled environmental
factors can be important drivers of interannual population fluctuations. These factors may include habitat
loss, weather patterns, global climate change, and random catastrophic events. Our model is easily
applicable to many large vertebrate predators in which age structure and demographic stochasticity are
important considerations. It may also be used to estimate demographic parameters that cannot be
feasibly estimated in the field




                                                                                                        779
White, Lauren (Erell Institute);

Home Range and Spacing Patterns of the Wedge Snouted lizard, Meroles cuneirostris.

Space use patterns can help interpret social structure, and can also indicate habitat preferences.
Meroles cuneirostris, a diurnal lacertid endemic to the west-central coast of Namibia , occupies an
ecotone consisting of sparsely vegetated sand dunes and an interdune gravel plain. The habitat varies in
both prey availability, with termites common in the gravel plain but rare in the dunes, as well as in
predator avoidance options; lizards can easily bury themselves in sand or escape into bushes in the
dunes but the coarse, packed sand and dearth of large shrubs precludes these strategies in the gravel
plain. Space use may reflect the relative advantages offered by the two habitat types as well as social
structure. Over a 4 week period during December 2011 – January 2012, resighting locations were
recorded for 95 marked adults on a study site approximately 30 m x 500 m following the base of a large
sand dune in the Namib-Naukluft National Park, Namibia. Recorded locations were compiled to estimate
home ranges and core areas using the Minimum Convex Polygon method. Home range estimates were
calculated for 89 animals. The mean ± SE home range size was 0.1887 ± 0.0417 ha for females and
0.1896 ± 0.0278 ha for males. Home range size did not differ significantly between the sexes. Results of
regression analysis also showed no significant relationship between body size and home range size.
Individuals in this population exhibit a high level of home range overlap (mean overlap: males = 973.4 ±
54.5% and females = 929.6 ± 54.5%), and with no relation to body size. The high levels of home range
overlap we found suggest that M. cuneirostris is not territorial. For each resighting, habitat was recorded;
the proportion of sightings and home range relative to each habitat was determined. Patterns of home
range/core area size, overlap, and habitat characteristics will be addressed by further analyses within and
between the sexes.



White, Mary (Southeastern Louisiana University); Sandage, Kelly (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Salinity Stress in Green Treefrogs (Hyla cinerea)

Salinity levels in the Lake Pontchartrain Basin of southern Louisiana have been rising over the past few
decades, potentially placing osmotic stress on the freshwater inhabitants of the region. Amphibians are
often considered to be indicators of environmental quality, as their permeable skin and reliance on
aquatic habitats make them susceptible to disturbances in their environment. Studies have shown that
increases in salinity can have large effects on amphibian survival and development, though there is a
great deal of variation in salt tolerance among species. We have been investigating biochemical effects
of increased salinity during the development of Green Treefrogs ( Hyla cinerea ). Our work focuses on
expression of stress-inducible genes such as heat shock genes and pro-opoimelanocortin (POMC).



White, Matthew (Ohio University); Kohli, Brooks; Kilbarger, Molly (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United
States)

Microsatellite DNA variation among natural, supplemented, and broodstock populations of Ohio
River

The muskellunge (Esox masquinongy) is an important game fish species. Although historically considered
to consist of 3 subspecies, none are currently recognized. It has been extensively managed both within
and outside its native range. A previous study indicated little variation in mitochondrial DNA control region



                                                                                                         780
sequences across the entire range of muskellunge. Our study evaluated microsatellite DNA variation
among populations within the Ohio River drainage. Ten populations consisting of 4 broodstock
populations, 4 natural populations, and 2 populations with a history of supplementation were surveyed at
5 tetranucleotide microsatellite loci. DNA was purified from fin clip and scale material. A STRUCTURE
analysis detected at least 5 genetic populations. There was evidence of both contemporary and historical
gene flow and no evidence for population bottlenecks. Mitochondrial DNA data suggested a recent (post-
Pleistocene) range expansion. The data suggests that 1) broodstock populations are retaining levels of
variation found in other natural populations; 2) supplemented populations do not show evidence of
reduced variation, and 3) population connectivity appears to have been maintained despite habitat loss
and lock and dam construction on the Ohio and Kanawha rivers.



White, Travis (Acadia Univeristy); Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Wolfville, NS, Canada); Pulsifer,
Mark (Nova Scotia Department of Natural Resources, Antigonish, NS, Canada)

Habitat selection, site fidelity, and communal behaviour of overwintering wood turtles (Glyptemys
insculpta) In Nova Scotia

The primary goals of this study are to gain a deeper understanding of micro-habitat properties that are
critical to overwintering in wood turtles (Glyptemys insculpta) near their northern range limit, and to
investigate possible relationships between sites selected, site fidelity, and group size. During times of
rapid environmental change, understanding population dynamics, structure, and movements at species‘
range limits is essential. This is usually difficult since most peripheral populations are small. However, our
study area in eastern Nova Scotia (ca.45° N) contains one of the densest and largest known wood turtle
populations within the entire species range. Adult wood turtles (n=25) were captured opportunistically
from May to October 2010 and fitted with radio transmitters. In 2011, 14 additional turtles were equipped,
including 7 juveniles. In November of both years, telemetry was used to locate each overwintering site;
thermal, chemical, and structural attributes were then characterized at each. Temperature data loggers
were deployed at each site. Our findings to date reveal that a notable portion of turtles are using
overwintering strategies that deviate from those reported elsewhere. Conventionally, wood turtles rely on
cool, highly oxygenated rivers and streams, and have been described elsewhere as "anoxia/hypoxia-
intolerant". In our study, most turtles (year 1: n=19; year 2: n=28) appear to follow conventional patterns,
overwintering in highly oxygenated rivers and tributaries. However, in year one, two females used
backwater pools that approached hypoxic conditions. Presently, a female is using an anoxic backwater
site (0.13 – 3.54 mg/L); and 3 females and 1 juvenile are using hypoxic sites with dissolved oxygen
ranging from 1.78 to 8.47mg/L. Of 39 turtles presently being monitored, 18 are aggregated. Visual
observations (year 1: n=3, year 2: n=2) of dormant males within 1 meter of a female suggest that
communal behavior is related to increased mating opportunities. Of 25 turtles monitored in both years, 16
showed site fidelity.



White, William (CSIRO Marine & Atmospheric Research); Last, Peter (CSIRO Marine & Atmospheric
Research, Hobart, T, Australia)

A review of taxonomy of chondrichthyan fishes: a modern perspective

Taxonomic clarity is a fundamental requirement as it forms the foundation of all other life sciences. In the
last decade, chondrichthyan taxonomy has undergone a ‗scientific renaissance‘ with more than 180 new
species formally described. This effort encompasses about 15% of the global chondrichthyan fauna which



                                                                                                          781
consists of 1185 currently recognised chondrichthyan species. The important role of chondrichthyan
taxonomy for conservation management has been highlighted in recent years with new species
descriptions or taxonomic resolution of a number of threatened species. These include Australian gulper
sharks (genus Centrophorus ) and speartooth sharks (genus Glyphis ) in coastal waters of Australia and
Borneo. Closer examination of other wide-ranging species for which the taxonomy was thought to be
stable, have shown that they consist of species complexes, e.g. manta rays ( Manta ) and spotted eagle
rays ( Aetobatus narinari complex), and highlights the need for critical re-examination of other ‗wide-
ranging‘ species. Molecular methods have provided another useful tool to taxonomists and they have
proven to assist greatly with identifying cryptic species and species complexes. However, the limitations
of particular molecular methods being used need to be carefully considered and there are some concerns
about how these are being integrating with classical taxonomy. The fundamental importance of taxonomic
nomenclature to life sciences is often poorly understood but striving for nomenclatural stability is a critical
component of taxonomy. Similarly, biological collections are an extremely vital asset to both taxonomists
and the broader scientific community. These collections have becoming increasingly important due in part
to molecular species identification initiatives such as the Barcode of Life which has resulted in a large
number of voucher specimens linked to tissue samples being deposited. Biological collections are also
proving to be imperative in biodiversity studies as they contain a ‗gold mine‘ of historical collection
information important for assessing changes in faunal assemblages. Resources are typically limited for
taxonomic research and the ‗ageing‘ taxonomic community is another issue of concern for the future of
taxonomy on this important group. Succession planning and better resource allocation will be essential to
ensure that this fundamental discipline is maintained into the future.



Whiting, Martin (Macquarie University); Holland, Brenden (University of Hawai'i, Canada); Keogh, Scott
(The Australian National University, Canada); Stuart-Fox, Devi (University of Melbourne, Canada)

Evolution of a conspicuous dynamic visual signal in an introduced chameleon

Rapid adaptive evolution frequently follows a significant change to an organism‘s environment, such as
during colonization of a novel habitat. Vertebrates, including Caribbean Anolis lizards and Galapagos
finches, have demonstrated a remarkable capacity for morphological change of functional traits (limb
length, beak size) on ecological time scales. Traits that are sexually selected can be similarly affected,
although well-documented examples from wild populations are rare (a notable exception is Trinidadian
guppies). The Jackson‘s chameleon ( Chamaeleo x. jacksonii ) from East Africa was inadvertently
introduced to the Hawaiian island of Oahu in 1972. In its native range, Jackson‘s chameleons are preyed
upon by a wide range of predators, including snakes and birds, which are thought to shape the dynamics
of color change in chameleons. We took advantage of the Hawaiian introduction, an environment with
only a few potential predators and therefore, very low predation pressure, to test for character release of
conspicuous social color signals. To test this hypothesis, we measured color change in response to
multiple social and predator stimuli in wild chameleons in both Hawai‘i and Kenya. We used visual
modelling of colour signals, together with irradiance and vegetation background color, to estimate signal
conspicuousness to both the chameleon and predator (bird, snake) visual systems. The Hawai‘i and
Kenya backgrounds were the same color, but the major difference was in brightness: the Hawai‘i
background was darker. As a result, chameleons from both Kenya and Hawai‘i were brighter against the
Hawai‘i background. However, Hawai‘i males were more conspicuous (courtship, display) against their
own background for some body regions (mainly gular), providing evidence for character release. Also,
Hawai‘i males more conspicuous (courtship, display) to snake and bird predators against their own
background for some body regions. We discuss how relaxing natural selection can result in signal release
in systems experiencing strong sexual selection.



                                                                                                           782
Whittaker, Kellie (University of Caifornia, Berkeley);

AmphibiaWeb: Using Bioinformatics to Track the World¿s 7000+ Amphibian Species

AmphibiaWeb (www.amphibiaweb.org) is a widely used bioinformatic collaboration that integrates
contributions from amphibian researchers, students, and the public with data from museum specimen
collections, using the latest tools in biodiversity informatics. Our goal is to enhance public and global
accessibility to information and specimen data for all amphibians. AmphibiaWeb hosts 15,000-20,000
queries daily on all aspects of amphibian natural history, distribution, conservation, taxonomy, and global
declines for the world's 7000+ species of amphibians. Information uniquely accessible on AmphibiaWeb
includes up-to-date tracking of newly described amphibian species, type locality mapping for new
species, dynamic range and occurrence mapping that incorporates amphibian specimen data from
HerpNET2 with IUCN's range maps, and a taxon-based photo browser that allows visualization of
representative members of any given clade simultaneously. Other features include: community-
contributed multimedia files (sound, video, and nearly 25,000 photos); links to FonoZoo's amphibian
sound files; access to IUCN accounts and links to Amphibian Species of the World taxonomic history for
all species; unique accounts for nearly a third of the world's amphibians, with some accounts in multiple
languages (served to Encyclopedia of Life as well); a Species of the Week; an Amphibian News Box
featuring a current journal article; reviews of factors contributing to amphibian declines; and a
compendium of amphibian decline literature with monthly updates.               AmphibiaWeb has a free,
downloadable iPhone app allowing local area searches and access to the website's content for all
species. Taxonomy is updated on a regular basis. Some major revisions to our family-level taxonomy
(AmphibiaWeb 2.0) have recently been implemented by our multi-institutional working subgroup of
amphibian taxonomic specialists. AmphibiaWeb encourages public participation via our collaboration with
iNaturalist's Global Amphibian Bioblitz. Further, we invite researchers, students, and herpetology courses
to submit photos and write accounts.



Wielstra, Ben (NCB Naturalis); Arntzen, Pim (NCB Naturalis, Leiden, The Netherlands)

The shifting interchange of two species of Triturus newts deduced from asymmetrically
introgressed mitochondrial DNA

If the geographical displacement of one species by another is accompanied by hybridization,
mitochondrial DNA can introgress asymmetrically, from the outcompeted species into the invading
species, over a large geographical extent. This phenomenon is shown by the two crested newt species
Triturus macedonicus and T. karelinii , on the Balkan Peninsula in south-eastern Europe. We first delimit