anagement of an Endangered Urban Viper: The Story of the Canebrake Rattlesnake
(Crotalus horridus) Coastal Plain population in Virginia, USA

Kleopfer, John D. (JD), Alan H. Savitzky, Chris E. Petersen, Scott M. Goetz. Cooperative Management of
an Endangered Urban Viper: The Story of the Canebrake Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) Coastal Plain
population in Virginia, USA.

The Canebrake Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) Coastal Plain population is listed as State Endangered
in Virginia, USA. The Coastal Plain population of this species reaches the northern limit of its range in the
heavily urbanized region of southeastern Virginia known as Hampton Roads. Approximately 1.6 million
people live within 30 kilometers of all known populations. The primary causes of its decline have been
habitat loss and human persecution. With financial support from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service‘s State
Wildlife Grants program and the Department of the Navy‘s Natural Resources Program, the Virginia
Department of Game and Inland Fisheries began a partnership with the U.S. Navy and academic
biologists to investigate its ecology. The research site is located in Chesapeake, Virginia at the 1,214
hectare Naval Support Activity Norfolk, Northwest Annex (NSANW). To date, 50 individual rattlesnakes
have been radio-tracked and almost 15,000 observations have been recorded. Information on feeding,
reproduction, shedding, hibernation, predation and movement has been gathered. This research has led
to the acquisition of lands for conservation, including the 1,619 hectare Cavalier Wildlife Management
Area, which is adjacent to NSANW. The partnership has also resulted in the development of the 2011
Canebrake Rattlesnake Conservation Plan, which summarizes 17 years of research and provides
guidance for future research and conservation efforts. In 2011, the Canebrake Rattlesnake Conservation
Center was established at NSANW. This on-site facility allows researchers to perform surgeries for radio-
telemetry and to continue monitoring this population without removing snakes from the research site for
processing and transmitter implantation.



Klymus, Katy (University of Missouri); Humfeld, Sarah; Gerhardt, Carl (University of Missouri, Canada)

Behavioral and phylogenetic differentiation in the canyon treefrog, Hyla arenicolor

Understanding how species arise is a fundamental topic in biology and can be addressed by examining
the evolutionary forces that lead to speciation. One avenue is to examine the first step in the speciation
process: population differentiation. By looking at both phenotypic and genetic differences among




                                                                                                         377
populations we can hypothesize about the evolutionary forces that have led to observed phenotypic
differentiation.

In general, if trait and genetic divergence exhibit similar variability, neutral genetic drift may explain the
degree of differentiation. If, on the one hand, populations exhibit high trait variation relative to genetic
variation, we may invoke divergent selection acting on those traits. If populations have low phenotypic
variation but exhibit large genetic differences, then selection may be acting to conserve a particular trait
variant.

In this study we examined both genetic and behavioral differentiation within the canyon treefrog, Hyla
arenicolor . We were particularly interested in understanding if selection was acting to prevent
advertisement call divergence among genetically distinct lineages. Using genetic loci, we found evidence
for past hybridization and mtDNA introgression between two H. arenicolor populations and the sister
species, H. eximia. Advertisement call differences among H. arenicolor lineages were found to better
reflect the inferred nuclear phylogeny (both exon and AFLPs) rather than a phylogeny inferred from
mtDNA. These results suggest that lineages are not as divergent from on another as previously assumed
based on mtDNA data, and that drift rather than selection plays a more important role in call
differentiation within this system. We also describe biologically significant variation in the advertisement
calls throughout this specie‘s extensive range. Playback experiments suggest females can discriminate
against populations using specific call parameters, indicating a role for behavioral reproductive isolation.
Our results provide insight into the complex evolutionary history of this group, have implications for the
study of character evolution in this group, and emphasize the need for studies to expand sampling to
include closely rela



Knapp, Charles R. (John G. Shedd Aquarium); Hines, Kirsten (IUCN Iguana Specialist Group, Key
Biscayne, FL, United States); Zachariah, Trevor (University of Illinois, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Chicago Zoological and Aquatic Animal Residency Program, Urbana, United States); White, C. LeAnn
(5USGS National Wildlife Health Center, Madison, WI, United States); Iverson, John B. (Earlham College,
Richmond, United States); Buckner, Sandra D. (IUCN Iguana Specialist Group, Nassau, Bahamas);
Romero, L. Michael; Lattin, Christine R. (Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States)

Physiological Impacts of Tourism and Food Supplementation on Endangered Insular Iguanas

Physiological responses caused by wildlife-tourism interactions can be pronounced in free-ranging
species. Tourism companies in The Bahamas and Caribbean are increasingly marketing rock iguana
(genus Cyclura) feeding as part of their activity packages. This type of tourism is likely to continually
expand, and therefore the effects of these human-wildlife interactions should be monitored, understood,
and managed effectively. Using multiple populations of Bahamian rock iguanas (C. cychlura figginsi and
C. c. inornata), we investigated 28 sex-specific responses to both human-visitation pressure, and
associated food provisioning with a variety of semi-natural and unnatural food items. Our response
variables included body condition, physiological stress, and multiple hematological and biochemical
parameters. For both sexes, body condition and physiological stress (baseline corticosterone levels) did
not differ between visited and non-visited sites, suggesting that rock iguanas on islands visited by tourists
are not chronically stressed. However, for both sexes there were significantly elevated corticosterone
levels after 30 min of capture and restraint, indicating that these rock iguanas can physiologically respond
to stressful stimuli. We recorded hematological and biochemical differences between visited and non-
visited sites in response to being food provisioned. For both sexes, rock iguanas from visited sites had
higher packed cell volume, higher uric acid and lower potassium. In addition, females from visited sites
had higher glucose and iron. Males from visited sites, on the contrary, had higher calcium, cholesterol,



                                                                                                          378
cobalt, copper, and selenium, but lower molybdenum. We conclude that differences between visited and
non-visited sites are likely due to unnatural food items offered by tourists and the consequential changes
in how rock iguanas from visited sites forage. These effects may potentially have debilitating
consequences over time in these long-lived species, or under adverse environmental conditions.



Knapp, Nikolai (University of Wurzburg); Konopik, Oliver (University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany);
Bon, Wuu Yih; Grafe, Ulmar (Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Malaysia)

Quantifying prey consumption by a tropical frog community: implications for ecosystem
consequences of amphibian declines

Knowledge about the ecosystem function of frogs is essential to assess consequences of global
amphibian decline on trophic interactions and ecosystem services. We estimated the daily amount of prey
(mostly arthropods) consumed by a tropical anuran community in a lowland mixed-dipterocarp rainforest
in Brunei Darussalam (Borneo). Values of consumed biomass per time were determined for numerous
prey organisms sorted to order level. Prey items included a wide range of arthropods, other frogs and
occasionally even snakes. To quantify prey consumption, abundance data on frogs was combined with
detailed information on each species‘ diet composition, obtained by stomach flushing and estimates of
daily nutrition requirements. In addition, prey uptake per day was estimated for certain frog and toad
species by following radio-tagged individuals and flushing stomachs before and after a 24 hour period of
foraging in their natural habitat. Feeding trials were used to correct for different digestion speeds of hard
and soft bodied prey items. Extrapolations of the impact of predation over 49,000 ha of rainforest (the
larger study area) were made by inferring a hypothetical stream network from a digital elevation model
with the assumption of a comparable frog community throughout the area. Our results provide a rough
estimate of total predation by a tropical anuran community and, thus, contribute to the understanding of
ecological functions of tropical anuran communities as an important group of insectivores in the rainforest
food web.



Knip, Danielle (The University of British Columbia); Heupel, Michelle (Australian Institute of Marine
Science, Townsville, Q, Australia); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Evaluating marine protected areas for the conservation of tropical coastal sharks

Global declines in shark populations have created uncertainty in the future status of many species and
conservation efforts are urgently needed. Marine protected areas (MPAs) are used increasingly as
conservation tools around the world, but how they benefit mobile and wide ranging species like sharks
remains unclear. To evaluate the degree of protection MPAs may provide for sharks, we used an array of
acoustic receivers to examine the movements and spatial use of two tropical coastal species within two
MPAs in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, Australia. Juvenile pigeye (Carcharhinus amboinensis) and
adult spottail (Carcharhinus sorrah) sharks were fitted with acoustic transmitters and monitored from 2009
to 2010. Both species displayed long-term use of MPAs, with some sharks detected for longer than 600
days. The mean percentage of time C. amboinensis and C. sorrah spent inside MPAs was 22% and 32%,
respectively. MPA use varied seasonally, with C. amboinensis spending a higher percentage of time
inside MPAs in summer (mean = 28%) and C. sorrah spending a higher percentage of time inside MPAs
in winter (mean = 40%). Although sharks used large areas inside MPAs, most tended to use only half of
the available protected space. In addition, all sharks made excursions from MPAs, but both species
exited and re-entered at consistent locations along the MPA boundaries. This research shows that MPAs



                                                                                                         379
have potential conservation benefits for shark populations by providing protection across different species
and life stages, and demonstrates how tracking studies can be used to help tailor MPA design to
maximize their effectiveness.



Knuckey, James (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Clerkin, Paul; Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine
Laboratories, Canada)

Biodiversity and Conservation of Western Indian Ocean Chondrichthyans

The biodiversity of the Western Indian Ocean chondrichthyans is relatively unknown compared to other
better studied regions, such as the western North Pacific, North Atlantic , and Indo-Pacific regions. The
Western Indian Ocean has at least 279 species overall, with 152 shark species, 120 batoid species, and
8 chimaera species. This number comprises 23.3% of the approximately 1 ,200 valid species of
chondrichthyans. The sharks are more diverse than the batoids, but this is most likely due to more
attention having been paid to the sharks than the batoids in this region. The Carharhiniformes (82
species), Myliobatiformes (46 species), Squaliformes (36 species), and Rajiformes (29 species) are the
most dominant groups in terms of species-richness within this region.         The close proximity of the
Western Indian Ocean to the Indo-Pacific, which has been shown to be a center of origin for the marine
tropics, may explain the relatively high number of species. Most chondrichthyan species accounted for in
this study are coastal species, which may explain why some of the families have lower numbers than
reported in other regions, such as the Rajiformes; a species group known to generally occur in deeper
waters of the tropics. Islands and island chains show a high degree of endemism compared to the
continental shelf and upper slope habitats. The majority of species found in this region are listed as Data
Deficient (100 species), Near Threatened (54 species), or Vulnerable (51 species) on the IUCN Red List.
Enhanced identification of Western Indian Ocean chondrichthyans is crucial for developing improved
management and conservation policies for this group.



Kobayashi, Soh (Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry); Abe, Seiya (Central Research
Institute of Electric Power Industr, Abiko city, 20, Japan); Matsuki, Rikyu (Central Research Institute of
Electric Power Industry, Abiko city, 20, Japan)

Fine-scale case study of detecting genetic structure and gene flow restriction of Japanese brown
frog caused by recent urbanization.

To understand and evaluate connectivity between habitats is one of the most important issues in
landscape ecology. There were only few not so much case studies for amphibians which treat this issue
in fine scale of landscape, such as several square kilometers. For efficient evaluation of gene flow in fine
scale, landscape genetic approaches will be the most valid way. In the present study, we tested applied
techniques of landscape genetics to evaluate the genetic structure of Japanese brown frog (Rana
japonica) in the study sitefine scale area (approximately 3 x 3 kilometers) at Inba area, Chiba prefecture,
Japan. Japanese brown frog is one of the locally decreasing species, and suitable model animal for such
analyses because their breeding sites habitats in our study site wereare paddy fields which were divided
by hills (known as Satoyama landscape), and considered to form a meta-population. We used D-loop
region of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) regions as genetic markers for calculating Fst and FCT, both which
are indices ofas genetic distance among populations. Fst was compared with geological distances and
locations of breeding sites by using Barrier, and FCT was compared with locations of breeding sites by
SAMOVA to detect barriers of gene flow. In As the results of mtDNA analyses, three genetic groups and



                                                                                                        380
three barriers of gene flow was found. and Implication from past aerial photographs revealed that those
genetic structures mightwould be caused by urbanization in lastthis 50 years which implied from past
aerial photographs.



Koch, Andre (Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig); Arida, Evy (Museum Zoologicum
Bogoriense, Canada); Misof, Bernhard; Böhme, Wolfgang (Zoological Research Museum Alexander
Koenig, Canada)

Did Southeast Asian Water Monitor Lizards (Varanidae: Varanus salvator Complex) colonize
Sulawesi by crossing Wallace's Line?

Phylogeographic relationships between island populations of Southeast Asian water monitor lizards were
investigated testing biogeographic hypotheses about the origin of the endemic Sulawesi populations.
These giant lizards have excellent dispersal abilities and a wide distribution range, thus providing optimal
preconditions to serve as model organisms for studies of biogeographic scenarios and past migration
routes for the colonization of oceanic islands in the Wallacea region. We applied amplified fragment
length polymorphisms (AFLP) with six selective primer combinations which yielded a total of 726
polymorphic markers for 92 Varanus spp. individuals within a size range of 60–600 bases. Anonymous
AFLP markers were analysed using the Neighbour-joining algorithm and split networks. Sulawesi is
inhabited by two closely-related, albeit distinct evolutionary lineages of water monitors, with surrounding
off-shore islands harbouring further endemic populations. The majority of these off-shore islands support
populations which are closest related to populations of the respective opposite regions of Sulawesi.
However, despite their geographic proximity, the populations of the Flores Sea Islands, which may have
functioned as stepping stones to Sulawesi, do not present the sister clade to the populations of the
southwestern peninsula of Sulawesi. Instead, the Flores Sea Islands populations form a well-supported
clade which, depending on the out-group samples included in the analyses, represents the sister group to
the remaining Sulawesi region. Also, the phylogenetic position of the Banggai Island population east of
Central Sulawesi varies. In any case, it is genetically quite distinct from the Sulawesi populations.
Likewise, V. cumingi from the southern Philippines does not show a close relationship to the monitor
populations of northern Sulawesi. Colonization of Sulawesi by water monitors by island hopping via the
Philippines in the north or the Lesser Sunda Islands in the south, respectively, can be excluded. Likewise,
an invasion from the Moluccas via the Banggai-Sula Islands in the east seems unlikely. Rather, starting
from Sundaland we suggest a successful crossing of the Makassar Strait, better known as Wallace‘s
Line, which coincides with the biogeographic border of the Eurasian continental (Sunda) shelf.



Koch, Andre (Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig); Arida, Evy (Museum Zoologicum
Bogoriense, Canada)

Discovery and underestimated Diversity of the Amphibians and Reptiles of Sulawesi and its
offshore Islands, Indonesia

Compared with the herpetofauna of the three Greater Sunda (shelf) Islands of Borneo, Sumatra, and
Java, the diversity of amphibian and reptile genera on Sulawesi is impoverished. The oceanic character
of the herpetofauna is the result of the million-year-long geographic isolation of Sulawesi which is
separated from surrounding islands by deep ocean trenches. However, despite ambitious investigations
by several industrious scientists during the past two centuries, recent fieldwork on Sulawesi and its
smaller off-shore islands has revealed that the diversity of amphibians and reptiles has been largely



                                                                                                        381
underestimated. Since the last herpetological synopsis was published in 1996, 36 new amphibian and
reptile species plus five subspecies have been described or newly recorded for Sulawesi and its satellite
islands. Seven species were redescribed or revalidated, nine have been overlooked, and 12 species,
mainly snakes, were deleted from Sulawesi‘s species inventory because they had been erroneously
recorded from the island. In addition, more than 40 species, mainly skinks (family Scincidae), have been
identified as new to science and await formal description. This represents an increase by 35%! In total,
about 210+ different species of amphibians (ca. 50 spp.) and reptiles (ca. 160 spp.) are currently
recognized from the Sulawesi region. They belong to six amphibian families (Bufonidae,
Ceratobatrachidae, Microhylidae, Ranidae, Hylidae, and Rhacophoridae) and twenty reptile families
(Agamidae, Dibamidae, Gekkonidae, Scincidae, Varanidae, Acrochordidae, Boidae, Colubridae,
Cylindrophiidae, Elapidae, Homalopsidae, Pythonidae, Typhlopidae, Viperidae, Xenopeltidae, Emydidae,
Geoemydidae, Testudinidae, Trionychidae, and Crocodylidae). Almost 60% of which are endemics. The
degree of endemicity, however, probably represents a considerable underestimation due to lack of exact
distribution data for many species.



Köhler, Jörn (Hessisches Landesmuseum Darmstadt); Lemme, Inga (Technical University of
Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany); Erbacher, Martina (Hessisches Landesmuseum Darmstadt,
Darmstadt, Germany); Kaffenberger, Nathalie (Senckenberg Natural History Collections, Dresden,
Germany); Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany)

Molecules and morphology suggest cryptic species diversity and an overall complex taxonomy of
fish scale geckos, genus Geckolepis

The current classification of the Malagasy-Comoroan geckos of the genus Geckolepis recognizes three
valid species and is based on morphological differences only. Species allocation of individuals is difficult,
mainly due to the insufficiently known degree of variation and in many cases the partial loss of the
integument in preserved specimens. We here study Geckolepis specimens from almost its entire known
range and combine molecular and morphological data to estimate species richness in the genus, and to
assess the taxonomic validity of the morphological differences proposed. Analyses of mitochondrial (12S,
ND4) and nuclear (RAG1, CMOS) gene sequences support three major clades and the presence of
various divergent lineages within these clades, some occurring in sympatry. Among lineages, external
morphology seems to be comparatively conservative and differences are faint in many cases. For each
major lineage, we summarize the morphological characters being most diagnostic to distinguish it from
other lineages. The combined molecular and morphological data strongly indicate the presence of highly
divergent lineages qualifying for the status of Confirmed Candidate Species in five cases, two of which
are tentatively assigned to Geckolepis maculata and G. typica. In other lineages, differentiation is
shallower and these may either qualify for Unconfirmed Candidate Species or Deep Conspecific
Lineages. In conclusion, our analysis provides evidence for an underestimation of species richness in the
genus and a complex evolutionary history, not reflected by current Geckolepis systematics.



Kohlsdorf, Tiana (University of Sao Paulo);

Life in the underground:           morphological      and    physiological    adaptations     of   fossorial
gymnophthalmid lizards

The colonization of subterranean microhabitats during the evolution of a given clade likely involves living
in an environment that is completely different from the surface. These two microhabitats (surface and the



                                                                                                         382
subterranean) differ in several abiotic aspects, including thermal fluctuation during a daily cycle and the
ground resistance imposed to locomotion, which in the case of fossorial animals represents moving
surrounded by a compact medium. Given the divergence in the selective pressures associated to these
two environments, it is expected that fossorial lineages deriving from epigeal ancestors have evolved
several modifications that enhance their organismal performance in this very peculiar ecological setting.
The present talk will focus on the lizard family Gymnophthalmidae, using the clade as a biological model
for understanding how life under the surface affects morphology, physiology and performance. The theme
is explored using an integrative approach, in a phylogenetic framework. In the Gymnophthalmidae,
colonization of subterranean environments evolved twice independently, and evolutionary changes in
many traits can be identified in association with these two events. For example, evolution of head design
in the group seems mostly shaped by habitat usage (instead of diet), with very specific forms associated
to fossorial habits. Also, body elongation and limb reduction is observed in all fossorial gymnophthalmids,
although the patterns identified differ among the representatives of the two clades living under the
surface. These modifications in body shape have clear implications for locomotion (burrowing efficiency
and sprint speeds), and for thermal relationships, as the ratio [surface area/volume] is different between
lizard-like and snakelike morphologies. Body shape in Gymnophthalmidae has also evolved in strong
association with climatic parameters, as rainfall, temperature seasonality and aridity, which suggests that
the colonization of fossorial microhabitats may be favoured in arid environments with climatic peculiarities.



Koizumi, Yuki (Depertment of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University); Hikida, Tsutomu
(Depertment of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 32, Japan)

Molecular phylogeography of three species of the genus Scincella (Squamata: Scincidae) from the
East Asian Islands revealed by mitochondrial DNA

Three species of the genus Scincella are recognized from the East Asian Islands. Among them, S.
boettgeri and S. formosensis are endemic to the southern Ryukyus (Miyako and Yaeyama Island Groups)
and Taiwan, respectively. Another species, S. vandenburghi, had long been considered as a Tsushima
Island endemic species, but the previous morphological analysis showed that this species also occurs in
Korea as well. We surveyed the phylogenetic relationships among species and genetic variations within
each population using nucleotide sequences of mitochondrial DNA. The results indicated that monophyly
of the populations of Scincella in the East Asian Islands, S. boettgeri, S. formosensis and S.
vandenburghi, was strongly supported, and that a clade of these three species was a sister group of the
S. modesta from the continent. Among them, S. vandenburghi was the most basally diverged species,
distributed in Korea and Tsushima Island. Other two species was divided into the three major clades. The
first clade is widely distributed in the southern Ryukyus exclusive of Yonagunijima Island, and the second
clade is distributed in only Yonagunijima Island. Scincella boettgeri is comprised of these two clades. The
third clade consisted of samples from Taiwan. Each clade showed high levels of genetic divergence, but
relationships among these three were unresolved. We surmised that the two clades of S. boettgeri and a
clade of S. formosensis have had a long history and assumed that the segregation and vicariance of
Scincella in the southern Ryukyus and Taiwan had occurred in the Pliocene. The first clade from the
southern Ryukyus comprised three subclades, and the third clade , S. formosensis from Taiwan, was
divided into four subclades. Only two subgroups in the southern Ryukyus were distributed sympatrically in
two small islands. Considering the relatively high genetic differentiation among and low nucleotide
substitution within each subgroup, we assumed that the first clade and third clade diverged into some
subclades during Pliocene and extended their distributional range to the present islands or localities
during more recently. In contrast, S. vandenburghi exhibited almost no genetic variation throughout its
range. We observed some haplotypes, involving up to five substitutions, and no shared haplotypes were



                                                                                                         383
detected among these regions, Korea Peninsula, Cheju Island and Tsushima Island. The genetic
differentiation and nucleotide diversity was low compared to that in other two species, S. boettgeri and S.
formosensis. This finding suggested recent occurrences of strong bottlenecks and subsequent rapid
dispersals to Korea and Tsushima Island, probably around the last glacial period.



Kok, Philippe (Vrije Universiteit Brussel); MacCulloch, Ross (Royal Ontario Museum, Canada); Means,
Bruce (Coastal Plains Institute and Land Conservancy, Canada); Roelants, Kim; Van Bocxlaer, Ines;
Bossuyt, Franky (Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Canada)

Recent faunal arrivals on ancient table mountains

The Pantepui region of South America is characterized by table mountains (tepuis) made of Proterozoic
(> 1.5 billion years old) sandstone – the highest reaching nearly 3km elevation – that are isolated from
their surroundings by vertical cliffs up to 1000m high. Due to its ancient age and complex topography, this
region has been assumed to be an ideal nursery of speciation and a potential continental counterpart to
oceanic archipelagos. Although phylogenetic studies have indicated that some taxa endemic to the
Pantepui region as a whole originated in the Tertiary, the dynamics of biotic interchange between tepuis,
and especially between tepui tops, remains an evolutionary enigma. Using a comprehensive sampling of
five Pantepui amphibian genera ( Anomaloglossus , Oreophrynella , Pristimantis , Stefania , and
Tepuihyla ), and one reptile family (Gymnophthalmidae) we present molecular genetic evidence showing
that most of the amphibian and reptile taxa currently found on tepui summits - even on the highest and
most inaccessible ones - are young, mostly resulting from Pleistocene and Holocene dispersal. Our
results highlight that even small vertebrates, presumed to be relatively poor dispersers, are capable of
maintaining extended gene flow between anciently isolated table mountains, or between tepui tops and
uplands, keeping single-tepui endemism to a minimum. Our results additionally point out that several
Pantepui taxa are characterized by surprisingly high phenotypic differentiation between tepui tops
populations (or between tepui tops and uplands populations) in the absence of (or very low) genetic
divergence.



Kolbe, Jason (University of Rhode Island);

Adaptation and plasticity during Anolis lizard introductions

Invasive species often experience substantial shifts in climatic conditions during introduction from their
native to non-native ranges. Whether these shifts elicit a phenotypic response, and how adaptation and
phenotypic plasticity contribute to phenotypic change, are key issues for understanding biological
invasions and the interplay among evolutionary processes. I combine modeling, field data, and a
laboratory experiments to test for changing thermal tolerances during the introduction of two tropical lizard
species to Florida, Anolis cristatellus from Puerto Rico and Anolis sagrei from Cuba. Species
distribution models and bioclimatic data analyses showed lower minimum temperatures and more
seasonal and annual variation in temperature in Florida compared to both Puerto Rico and Cuba.
Laboratory acclimation experiments showed both species decrease their critical thermal minimum
temperature (CTMin) after being held at a low temperature. The introduced South Miami population of A.
cristatellus has diverged from its native-range source population by acquiring low-temperature
acclimation ability. By contrast, the introduced Key Biscayne population showed little change compared
to its source. Introduced populations of A. sagrei from Tampa and Miami both showed low-temperature
acclimation, but differences in CTMin persisted throughout the course of the experiment, suggesting



                                                                                                         384
possible adaptive divergence between these two introduced populations. Our climate analyses predicted
an adaptive response of thermal plasticity for introduced populations, which was observed in some but all
comparisons. The acquisition or divergence of thermal plasticity by introduced Anolis populations in
Florida may be advantageous for long-term persistence and expansion of their non-native ranges.



Kolmann, Matthew (Florida State University); Huber, Daniel (University of Tampa, Canada); Dean,
Mason (Max Planck Institute, Canada); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University Coastal & Marine
Laboratory, Canada)

Feeding performance in a durophagous stingray

Durophagy is a feeding strategy which is typified by the majority of an organism‘s diet being comprised of
hard-shelled invertebrates. Implicit in this definition is not only the ingestion of hard-shelled prey but also
the mechanical dismantling of the prey carapace. The cownose ray, Rhinoptera bonasus, is a large
coastal pelagic stingray thought to specialize on bivalve prey. Investigation of feeding performance in
such an animal is particularly interesting in such that the ray‘s skeletal structure is oftentimes much more
compliant than the skeleton of its prey. Using traditional morphometric analysis of jaw adductor muscle
architecture coupled with physiological estimations of muscle forces we use a three-dimensional static
equilibrium model which calculates bite forces in cownose rays over their ontogeny. Additional
considerations of our model include the notion of asymmetrical biting and a jaw lever system shift which
maximizes mechanical advantage. Here we present the first biomechanical model for a myliobatiform
stingray using bite force as a performance metric. Preliminary data regarding bite force production in
Rhinoptera over their ontogeny show force production spanning from 17 N in neonate animals to over 200
N in mature adults. Concern regarding the effect of cownose ray predation on commercial bivalve
species is addressed with consideration to ecomorphology, specifically how high bite forces in
Rhinoptera translate to feeding success on commercial shellfish.



Komaki, Shohei (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University);
Kurabayashi, Atsushi; Mafizul, Islam (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science,
Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, 40, Japan); Tojo, Koji (Department of Biology, Faculty of
Science, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, 26, Japan); Sumida, Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology,
Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, 40, Japan)

Distributional change and epidemic introgression in overlapping areas of Japanese pond frog
species over 30 years

Pelophylax nigromaculatus, P. porosus porosus, and P. p. brevipoda are three pond frog species
distributed in Japan. The distribution of each frog overlaps at two basins in central Japan (P.
nigromaculatus and P. p. porosus in the Matsumoto basin, and P. nigromaculatus and P. p. brevipoda in
the Ina basin), and hybrid descendants have been found in these areas. To clarify the distributional areas
and hybrid zones of the frogs, and to understand the mode of introgressive hybridization and its impact on
the frog populations, we conducted exhaustive sampling at each basin and performed allozyme and
mtDNA analyses with 233 individuals. In the Matsumoto basin, we analyzed 199 individuals (from 16
localities), and 44 P. nigromaculatus, 33 P. p. porosus, 8 possible F1 hybrids, and 34 hybrid descendants
between P. nigromaculatus and P. p. porosus were detected. Comparing the present distribution and that
of 30 years ago, it is revealed that the distribution of P. p. porosus has been narrowed and fragmented by
the invasion of P. nigromaculatus. Allozyme and mtDNA data of hybrid individuals strongly suggested
directional hybridization between female P. p. porosus and male P. nigromaculatus. Because



                                                                                                           385
reproductive efforts in females are usually much larger than those in males, when directional hybridization
occurs, mother species will suffer more damage than father species. Thus, the distributional change
would have been caused by the invasive directional hybridization by male P. nigromaculatus. In the Ina
basin, we analyzed 114 individuals (from 14 localities), and 45 P. nigromaculatus, 6 P. p. brevipoda, 1 F1
hybrid, and 61 hybrid descendants were detected. Pelophylax nigromaculatus was distributed over the
entire area of this basin and the distribution of P. p. brevipoda was limited to the northern part of the basin
sympatric to P. nigromaculatus. Comparing to the past report (30 years ago), distributional change of
these two frog species was not observed. However, our genetic analyses detected very few ―pure‖ P. p.
brevipoda individuals (n = 8) while we found 35 P. p. brevipoda–like individuals based on external
morphology. Given that these species have been co-occurred in this basin at least for 3 decades and
population size of P. p. brevipoda has been very small, ―pure‖ P. p. brevipoda individuals would have
been reduced by long-term accumulation of introgressed gene from P. nigromaculatus into P. p.
brevipoda populations. Consequently, this study shows that, in both Matsumoto and Ina basins, P.
porosus populations are commonly threatened by interspecific-hybridizations and subsequent gene
introgressions from P. nigromaculatus. Among the basins, however, introgressive hybridizations damaged
P. porosus populations in different ways.



Konopik, Oliver (University of Wuerzburg); Fayle, Tom (University of South Bohemia, Ceske Budejovice,
Czech Republic); Steffan-Dewenter, Ingolf (University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany); Grafe, Ulmar
(University Brunei Darussalam, Bandar Seri Begawan, Germany)

Impacts of logging on niche partitioning and food web structure of anuran ant-specialist
communities in lowland tropical rain forest in Borneo

As virtually all anurans are carnivorous, they are expected to play an important role as top-down
regulators of arthropods in places where they are diverse and abundant such as in Southeast Asian
rainforests. Arthropods and especially ants are well known to play key roles in tropical ecosystems, such
as pollination, seed dispersal and predation. Thus, abundant arthropod predators are likely to interact with
these ecosystem services.

Our study took place within the framework of the SAFE project (Stability of Altered Forest Ecosystems) in
Southeast Asia on the island of Borneo. We flushed stomachs of riparian anurans, which are the species-
richest amphibian communities on Borneo. We collected the samples at night in both secondary and
primary forests. In total we sampled more than 1000 individuals from 28 species. Prey items were
identified to order level with the exception of ants that were identified to genus and assigned to
morphospecies (or species where possible). From this dataset we were able to categorize the riparian
anuran species into ant-specialists, ant-avoiders and generalists. In addition, we collected ecological data
from the literature to assign the different ant taxa to certain ecological groups.

An unusually high number of over 226 ant morphospecies from 59 genera were found within the sampling
area. The number of ant species within a single stomach sample differed between frog species, but
generally ranged between 5 and 22. The composition of ant taxa eaten by the frogs together with their
ecological characteristics revealed a strong niche partitioning for the foraging habitat of the anuran
community: leaf litter, arboreal and generalist. We also identified differences in the food web structure
between secondary and primary forests that can be used to further clarify the shift in ecological
functioning in human modified forests.




                                                                                                           386
Konstantinidis, Peter (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Olsson, Lennart (Friedrich Schiller University
Jena, Jena, Germany); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United
States)

Comparative ontogeny of the musculoskeletal systems of the head in non-teleostean
actinopterygians

The musculoskeletal system of the head and jaws of actinopterygian fishes has been the focus of many
studies due to their proposed key factor role for this group‘s evolutionary diversification. Most studies
however have either been concentrated on highly specialized teleostean groups or very broadly
comparative studies of distantly related taxa. To better understand the phylogenetic history of the
musculoskeletal system of the head and the jaw apparatus a more comprehensive and comparative study
of closely related taxa is needed. Therefore we have begun a comparative ontogenetic study of non-
teleostean actinopterygians. The juvenile and adult stages of these species are highly derived and their
aberrant states can easily be misinterpreted. In contrast, early in morphological development, highly
complex structures such as the head and the jaws are organized more simply and can homologous
structures can more easily be traced from their first appearance through to their terminal conditions. A
comparison of the early ontogeny of the musculoskeletal structures of the head across taxa will allow a
more detailed understanding and better resolution of the evolutionary processes leading to the
diversification of actinopterygian fishes. In this study we examined complete ontogenetic series of
Acipenser transmontanus, Polyodon spatula, Lepisosteus osseus, and Amia calva using whole mount
immunohistochemistry, 3D-reconstrcution of soft tissues, histology, and clearing and staining. The results
of this study will be discussed and used as the base of our ongoing study of morphological diversification
of the jaw apparatus within teleostean fishes.



Konstantinidis, Peter (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine
Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States); Metscher, Brian (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria);
Olsson, Lennart (Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Comparison of the jaw development between in the North American paddlefish, Polyodon
spathula, and the white sturgeon, Acipenser transmontanus

In this study, we compare the development of the jaws and associated musculature of the North
American paddlefish Polyodon spathula and the white sturgeon Acipenser transmontanus. Both taxa,
members of the order Acipenseriformes, have specialized feeding strategies: adult paddlefishes are filter
feeders with a large forward facing mouth, and adult white sturgeons are bottom feeders with a
subterminal, ventrally directed mouth. To identify the ontogenetic changes that result in these differences
in the adult condition for each species we used whole-mount antibody staining of the musculature,
histology, clearing and staining, microCT imaging of soft tissues, and 3D-reconstruction techniques. We
document that these differences in feeding style are strongly reflected in the morphology of the jaws and
the result of changes introduced in late stages of development. Paddlefishes have an elongated
palatoquadrate that is enclosed laterally by the large adductor mandibulae, while the palatoquadrate of
the white sturgeon is a stout cartilaginous block with a relatively small adductor mandibulae muscle,
connecting the palatoquadrate and Meckel‘s cartilage close to the jaw joint. Although the terminal
conditions are highly disparate between these two species, early ontogenetic stages of the two species
closely resemble each other. This leads to the hypothesis that developmental constraints in early
ontogeny are strongly linked to larval feeding behaviour.




                                                                                                        387
Korfel, Chelsea (The Ohio State University); Hetherington, Thomas (The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States)

Detecting a lower temperature threshold for amphibian survival in the context of an endemic
pathogen, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd): identifying an environmental refuge for high
Andean frogs

The amphibian chytrid, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), has contributed to the declines and
extirpations of anurans worldwide, and tadpoles are a likely reservoir for this enzootic disease. Here, we
have studied the prevalence of Bd in Gastrotheca pseustes tadpoles ranging from 2500-4200 masl in
Cajas National Park. While other studies have tested the high-temperature climactic threshold for Bd, our
work studies the lower critical limit for infection. Temperature decreased with increasing altitude at our
sites, and Bd prevalence also decreased with increasing altitude / decreasing temperature. The upper
limit of G. pseustes distribution corresponds to lab-tested temperatures near the critical minimum for Bd.
We also provide evidence that Bd-infection in tadpoles may result in poor body condition. These findings
suggest searching for rare species at the ecological edges of their distributions and that amphibian
conservation efforts should be conducted beyond the critical temperature limits of the fungal pathogen,
Bd.



Korfel, Chelsea (The Ohio State University); Hetherington, Thomas (The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States)

Seasonal And Habitat-associated Patterns Of Bd Infection In Green Frogs (Lithobates clamitans)
And Bullfrogs (L. catesbeianus) In Central Ohio

The amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), is widespread throughout central
Ohio. Green frogs (Lithobates clamitans) and bullfrogs (L. catesbeianus) are two generalist amphibian
species that are active from spring through autumn in Ohio and inhabit a broad range of aquatic habitats,
including streams, emergent wetlands, and vernal pools. We collected samples of these species from
March – November for two seasons (2010, 2011) and in different wetland habitats. Patterns of
occurrence of Bd were associated with both season and habitat, but these patterns of occurrence were
not correlated with infection intensity. On multiple occasions individuals were sampled in the same habitat
months apart, and data from these recaptured animals showed that frogs can lose, gain, and maintain low
intensity infections throughout the season of amphibian activity. Both asymptomatic bullfrogs and green
frogs were found with infection intensities above the reported critical threshold of 10,000 zoospore
equivalents; however, most infections were low intensity. We found that frogs displayed higher infection
rates but lower infection intensities in cooler conditions such as springtime or ravine streams compared to
warmer conditions such as summertime or emergent wetlands. These findings demonstrate that Bd can
persist in temperate environments experiencing temperatures well beyond the range of thermal tolerance
of Bd in laboratory experiments. Our findings also suggest that species such as green frogs and bullfrogs
can serve as reservoirs of Bd in temperate environments. Such information on the dynamics between
amphibian hosts and this fungal pathogen in a temperate environment contributes to a better
understanding of potential impacts of Bd on vulnerable amphibian species in temperate habitats
worldwide.




                                                                                                        388
Kotharambath, Ramachandran (University of Kerala); Wilkinson, Mark (The Natural History Museum,
London, London, United Kingdom); Oommen, Oommen V (University of Kerala, Trivandrum, India);
George, Sanil (Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, India); Nussbaum, Ronald
A (University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology and Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Ann
Arbor, United States); Gower, David (The Natural History Museum, London, London, United Kingdom)

Establishing the systematics of poorly known, elusive and ''lost'' caecilian species: the case of
Ichthyophis longicephalus Pillai 1986 (Amphibia: Gymnophiona: Ichthyophiidae) from the Western
Ghats of India.

The systematic foundation of most peninsular Indian caecilian species, both old and recent discoveries, is
generally weak. Species characterizations are mostly based only on type descriptions, using small
samples from point localities. The lack of follow-up systematic studies of described species coupled with
their generally cryptic habits has resulted in the poor understanding of the taxonomy, distribution,
population status and natural history of most peninsular Indian caecilians.

Ichthyophis longicephalus Pillai, 1986 is the least well-known striped Ichthyophis from the Western Ghats,
a 1600 km long mountain chain parallel to the western coast of India. This species has long been known
only from a poorly preserved holotype, collected from Silent Valley National Park in 1979, and a doubtful
referred specimen from c. 320 km south of the type locality. We conducted extensive fieldwork in 2009-
2010 aimed at ‗rediscovering‘ this species and stabilizing its systematics. The 2010 fieldwork was part of
the Amphibian Specialist Group of Conservation International‘s ''Search for the Lost Amphibians''
programme 2010. We conducted > 255 person hours of digging at 11 localities in forest and
anthropogenic habitats spread along approximately 250 km of the southern Western Ghats. We did not
find I. longicephalus in 47 hours of digging at its type locality, but we did find seven new specimens at two
new localities, 52 and 104 km north of the type locality. In addition, two overlooked specimens collected in
1990 from a third locality, 105 km north of the type locality, can also be identified as I. longicephalus.
Morphological comparison with types of Ichthyophis allows the new material to be referred to I.
longicephalus and for this species to now be better characterized. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data are
consistent with the interpretation that the new specimens represent a single species distinct from (and
most closely related to I. tricolor among) sampled congeners. The specimen previously referred to I.
longicephalus from c. 320 km south of the type locality is not I. longicephalus and likely represents an
undescribed species. The ‗rediscovery‘ of I. longicephalus, in disturbed habitats and new localities (some
of them protected), indicates that the species should be transferred from the Data Deficient category to
the Least Concern category of the IUCN Red List. The search for I. longicephlaus also generated new
knowledge on the distribution of other Western Ghats caecilians, including discovery of a hitherto
unknown indotyphlid species. Our study shows that new field surveys can contribute substantially to the
understanding of caecilians, especially generating the quality voucher specimens needed to underpin
understanding of diversity and distribution. India is fortunate in having native caecilians and caecilian
biologists, but more work needs to be done to make the most of this opportunity.



Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo); Vance, Carrie; Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi
State, United States)

Emerging trends and challenges for in-vitro fertilization as a conservation tool for amphibian
captive assurance programs

For decades now developmental and evolutionary biologists have been using anurans as research
models due to the unique and rapid development of the tadpole life-stage. In order to collect gametes,



                                                                                                         389
eggs and sperm, for their studies and to insure that animals could continue to contribute multiple times to
subsequent experiments, a means had to be devised to induce spermiation and ovulation from live
animals. This research need ushered in the study of anuran hypothalamic hormones and pituitary
gonadotropins as well as the study of mammalian non-homologous hormone replacement therapy. Two
hormones that have been widely used for stimulating reproduction in amphibians include a synthetic
analog of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
These two hormones efficacy for inducing spermiation or ovulation appear to be species-specific even
within similar taxonomic families. For example, LHRH is much more potent for stimulating spermiation in
Rana pipiens, whereas hCG is more potent for Rana sevosa. While there is a vast amount of literature on
the use of hormones to induce sperm collection and ovulation in a few laboratory model anuran species,
there has been limited application of these technologies to endangered species. In addition to challenges
associated with which hormone is most efficacious for obtaining gametes, collectively we know that the
following factors can impact the success of adapting these protocols to new species: 1) route of hormone
administration; 2) concentration of hormone; 3) timing of collections and synchronization; 4) how to collect
spermic urine or express eggs; and 5) frequency of hormone administration. In particular, studies
applying assisted reproduction technologies to urodeles and caecilians have been virtually ignored
placing these captive assurance colonies in greater threat of losing gene diversity over time than for
anurans. This symposium presentation will summarize what we know about the use of hormone therapy
for amphibian natural breeding and assisted reproduction, as well as emerging trends and challenges for
the future.



Kriger, Kerry (SAVE THE FROGS!);

SAVE THE FROGS! -- Promoting a Society That Respects and Appreciates Nature and Wildlife

Creating a frog-friendly human society is the single greatest action we can take to protect amphibians and
the habitats on which they depend. In May 2008 I founded SAVE THE FROGS! (www.savethefrogs.com),
America‘s first and only public charity dedicated to protecting amphibians. SAVE THE FROGS! works in
California, across the USA and worldwide to protect amphibian populations and to promote a society that
respects and appreciates nature and wildlife. Save The Frogs scientists have given over 200 public
presentations on amphibian conservation to schools, universities, government agencies, community
groups, businesses and nonprofits, to more than 10,000 attendees. We conceived and coordinate the
annual Save The Frogs Day, the world‘s largest day of amphibian education and conservation action.
Save The Frogs Day has been officially recognized by the Governors of Virginia and North Carolina, and
has been featured on CNN worldwide TV and the front page of Le Monde. Our supporters have held
Save The Frogs Day events in 29 countries. SAVE THE FROGS! has an ongoing campaign to get the
harmful pesticide Atrazine federally banned and out of production. On the 3rd Annual Save The Frogs
Day I led an anti-Atrazine rally at the steps of the US Environmental Protection Agency DC and a week
later gave a presentation on amphibian conservation to ten of the agency‘s pesticide scientists and
delivered over 10,000 petition signatures calling for an Atrazine ban. We have gotten two restaurants and
76 supermarkets to stop selling frog legs, and 12 schools to abandon frog dissections in exchange for
free Digital Frog 2.5 virtual dissection software. At my request, the City of Santa Cruz, California passed
legislation banning the importation, sale, release and possession of American Bullfrogs (Rana
catesbeiana), and we are calling on the state of California to do the same. In September 2011, we
launched SAVE THE FROGS! Ghana, the first international branch of SAVE THE FROGS!, and we are
now making plans for SAVE THE FROGS! Bangladesh, where we have active supporters at five
universities. The SAVE THE FROGS! website (www.savethefrogs.com) has over 250 pages of
information and has been accessed by over one million visitors. I encourage all scientists and graduate



                                                                                                        390
students to give public presentations or lead field excursions to show members of the public wild
amphibians in their natural habitats on future Save The Frogs Days; to contact their local media outlets to
offer interviews; and to impress upon their undergraduates the importance of nonprofit organizations as
an integral aspect of amphibian conservation efforts.



Krochmal, Aaron (Washington College);

Habitat Familiarity Drives Successful Terrestrial Navigation in Eastern Painted Turtles (Chrysemys
picta picta)

Aquatic turtles leave the water and traverse terrestrial habitats during oviposition or when seeking out
new aquatic habitats. Though overland movements are central to the biology of aquatic turtles, relatively
few studies have been devoted to nature, patterns and mechanisms of such movements, in part because
their fleeting nature makes them difficult to document. Using radiotelemetry, we investigated the terrestrial
movements of Eastern Painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta picta ) as they left an ephemeral water source
seeking new aquatic habitats. We monitored turtles at Chesapeake Farms (Kent Co, MD), a 3300-acre
wildlife management property where certain ponds are drained each summer as part of a waterfowl
management regime, enabling us to investigate how turtles naturally seek out new aquatic habitats. We
radiotagged 19 adult C. p.picta and monitored their movements from the time they left their home pond
until they reached a new, permanent water source. For comparison, we translocated 10 individual C. p.
picta from the Chester River Field Research Center (Queen Anne‘s Co, MD) to the same focal ponds at
Chesapeake Farms – a straight-line distance of 11.5 mi – and monitored them alongside resident turtles.
All resident turtles located a new, permanent water source within 24h of leaving their home pond.
Residents followed one of four specific, intricate routes to new water sources, and animals monitored for
two seasons (N=10) followed identical routes both years. All translocated turtles failed locate new aquatic
habitat in 480h, and instead, roamed the terrestrial habitat without direction. Even when portions of their
routes overlapped with those of resident animals, translocated animals failed to locate water, indicating
that they were unable to navigate novel habitats using sensory information alone. Relative to residents,
translocated individuals traveled greater distances at slower rates, changed direction more frequently,
and moved in irregular, non-linear patterns, failing to avoid navigation barriers. When taken together,
these results indicate that turtles seem to rely on habitat familiarity – as opposed to sensory information –
to direct successful overland movements, demonstrate the importance of habitat familiarity to directing
turtle movements overland, and call into question the suitability of translocation as a conservation method
for aquatic turtles.



Kroetz, Andrea (University of South Alabama, Dauphin Island Sea Lab); Drymon, J. Marcus (Center for
Ecosystem Based Fishery Management, Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Canada); Powers, Sean P. (University
of South Alabama, Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Canada)

Did the Closure of Katrina Cut Impact the Movements of a Coastal Shark?

Bonnetheads ( Sphyrna tiburo ) are highly mobile fish that occupy dynamic coastal environments.
Identifying the factors influencing the distribution of these fish is essential for understanding potential
impacts induced from anthropogenic alterations to coastal ecosystems. Dauphin Island is a barrier island
that was split into two halves in 2005 by Hurricane Katrina. This opening, known as Katrina Cut, allowed
for water flow between the Gulf of Mexico and Mississippi Sound and also served as a potential
passageway for mobile consumers to move freely between the two water bodies. Following the



                                                                                                         391
Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, Katrina Cut was closed off by a solid rock wall in an attempt to
prevent oil from reaching the shoreline. Acoustic telemetry was used to asses if altering Dauphin Island‘s
natural coastline hindered ingress/egress of bonnetheads into Mississippi Sound. There were changes in
bonnethead movement from 2010-2011. Prior to the closure of Katrina Cut, bonnethead detections were
concentrated in a small area proximal to the cut during spring and summer of 2010. Following the closure
of Katrina Cut, telemetered sharks relocated to the west tip of Dauphin Island and Petit Bois Island, MS
during spring and summer 2011. A shift in preferred prey, habitat or abiotic parameters all present
possible explanations for the shift in distribution of this coastal shark. Regardless of the mechanism,
acoustic telemetry presents a means by which to identify a rapid shift in habitat use by a mobile consumer
in response to an anthropogenic alteration.



Kross, Chelsea (University of South Carolina Upstate); Gibbs, Elliott; Hayes, Adrian; Pilgrim, Melissa
(University of South Carolina Upstate, Canada)

The occurrence and calling phenologies of anurans in the Piedmont of South Carolina

Of the 6,260 described species of amphibians, 32.5% are listed as globally threatened by the World
Conservation Union. In response to global amphibian declines, the Declining Amphibian Task Force
developed the North American Amphibian Monitoring Program (NAAMP). The program uses breeding call
surveys to monitor anuran populations regionally. South Carolina joined NAAMP in 2008. As part of this
program, we conducted call surveys for 110 potential breeding sites distributed within 11 routes that span
10 Piedmont counties. Following standard NAAMP protocol for data collection, we completed 1, 257 call
surveys between 4/10/2008 and 6/23/2011. In this study, we used our call survey data to evaluate
species richness, anuran distributions, interspecific variation among anuran calling phenologies, and
relative abundance of detected anuran species. We recorded calling activity at each of the 110 potential
breeding sites and documented the occurrence of 16 anuran species in our region. The species we
documented were widespread, as we recorded 8 of our 16 species calling at over 40% of our sites. We
detected interspecific variation in calling phenologies. Species calling had clear times of peak calling
activity and we separated them into early-, mid-, and late-season breeding assemblages. Most species in
our region appear to have some established populations, as we determined that average calling
intensities for 15 of the 16 species were greater than one.       Using an ANOVA, we determined that
average calling intensities for our 8 most frequently recorded species differed significantly (F 7,989 =
50.5, p< 0.001). Tukey‘s HSD indicated that the eight average calling index scores separated into 5
groups. Overall, data we collected are contributing to a growing amount of information relevant to
monitoring the presence and persistence of anuran species.          Our hope is that through time such
information databases will allow researchers to develop conservation strategies that could slow
amphibian decline.



Kruger, Donnavan (North-West University); Weldon, Che; du Preez, Louis (North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa)

Naming an umbrella: Morphology of the elygium

Tadpoles and adults of several frog species have a projection over the pupil of the eye that is believed to
be an adaptation to protect the eye from excessive light. In tadpoles this projection is a pigmented zone
originating from the dorsal margin of the iris and is called an elygium, whereas in the adult frog‘s eye the
projection is a fleshy dilation of the iris stroma, extending over the pupil and referred to as an



                                                                                                        392
umbraculum. However, these terms are commonly confused and used arbitrarily. This study aimed to
examine the ultrastructure of the eye in the Phofung River Frog (Amietia vertebralis) tadpoles using light
and transmission electron microscopy and to provide clear guidelines for the use of the terms elygium
and umbraculum. The elygium consists of an accumulation of chromatophores nested between the
stroma and corneal endothelium. A smaller ventral elygium is also present in this species and has the
same morphological arrangement as the dorsal elygium. The umbraculum is a homologous structure in
the eye of post-metamorphic A. vertebralis that starts to develop already in the tadpole and below the
overlaying elygium. The umbraculum is an extension of the iris stroma and analogous to the ventral
pupillary nodule, which is present in most frog species.



Kuhajda, Bernard (Tennessee Aquarium Conservation Institute); Piteo, Matthew; Fluker, Brook
(University of Alabama, Canada)

Evaluation of breeding site fidelity in the imperiled Trispot Darter, Etheostoma trisella

The Trispot Darter, Etheostoma trisella , is endemic to the Coosa River drainage of the Mobile Basin,
where it is extremely rare. Because E. trisella , as other members of the subgenus Ozarka , requires
highly specialized spawning habitat of spring seeps in ephemeral and headwater streams, it is
susceptible to habitat destruction and alteration. In October 2008, E. trisella was rediscovered in Little
Canoe Creek (Big Canoe Creek tributary) in St. Clair County, Alabama, after not being collected in the
state for 50 years, and multiple breeding sites have been discovered within the same creek system.
During the non-breeding season E. trisella resides in creeks and small rivers and must locate ephemeral
streams to spawn annually, therefore they may possess homing abilities to locate natal seep areas. To
test the possibility of homing ability or breeding site fidelity in E. trisella , microsatellite DNA data were
compared between four breeding sites within the Little Canoe Creek system from samples collected
during the 2011 breeding season. These included three ephemeral seep areas with only 200 to 800
meters separating the mouths of these tributaries and a fourth spawning area approximately 5.4
kilometers upstream. We evaluated genetic structure, migration, and homing tendencies. The four
breeding sites were not a homogenous group. Genetically based assignment tests showed that
individuals were more often assigned to their home site compared to other potential breeding sites, and
each breeding site contained a high percentage of non-migrants. Collectively, these results suggested the
possibility of breeding site fidelity for E. trisella . This information on the breeding behavior of E. trisella
is crucial for the conservation of this imperiled species, as individuals may prefer to return to their natal
site for spawning, as opposed to other potential breeding sites, and habitat destruction or alteration of
breeding sites could negatively impact reproductive success of E. trisella more than previously thought.



Kuhn, Arianna (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron; Todd, Jackman (Villanova University, Biology
Department, Villanova, PA, United States)

Molecular phylogenetics of South African flat geckos (Gekkonidae: Afroedura) Loveridge, 1944
and the recognition of seven new species

The Family Gekkonidae comprises over 900 species in 54 genera and is nearly cosmopolitan in its
distribution. Among the areas of highest gekkonid diversity is the geologically complex and ecologically
diverse region of southern Africa. A number of gecko genera endemic to this region have been studied
phylogenetically, but one diverse genus of particular biogeographic interest for which no explicit
phylogenetic hypotheses have been published is Afroedura. The members of this genus are restricted in



                                                                                                            393
their distributions chiefly to rocky areas of South Africa but a limited number of species extend northwards
into Namibia, southern Angola, Zimbabwe, and southern Mozambique. The distribution of flat geckos,
however, is highly fragmented and most species are allopatric. We investigated phylogenetic
relationships for 14 of the 18 recognized species and subspecies of Afroedura, using nine molecular
markers, six of which have never been used in a comparative framework for squamates. Using Likelihood
and Bayesian analyses, a species tree was estimated that identified four distinct clades corresponding to
discrete biogeographic regions. Afroedura hawaquensis, the only representative taxon from the
southwestern Cape, is sister to all other Afroedura. Other groups include an Eastern Cape clade
comprising A. karroica, A. tembulica, and A. amatolica, and a tropical clade — A. bogerti, A. africana, A.
loveridgei, and A. transvaalica. Remaining species fell into an Eastern clade distributed chiefly in
Mpumalanga and Limpopo provinces of South Africa and in Swaziland. This final clade includes several
recognized species — A. langi, A. marleyi, A. major, and A. multiporis, but also seven new species, all
previously distinguished on morphological grounds but as yet undescribed. These new taxa highlight the
significance of the Eastern Escarpment and adjacent regions for Afroedura and provide further evidence
for discrete areas of endemism in this part of the subcontinent. Afroedura‘s area of greatest diversity
complements those of other rupicolous geckos in the genera Pachydactylus and Goggia, which show
their greatest richness in the southwestern Cape and in arid regions of the Northern Cape and Namibia.



Kühnel, Susanne (Friedrich Schiller University Jena); Beckmann, Felix (Helmholtz-Zentrum Gesthacht,
Canada); Kupfer, Alexander (University of Potsdam, Canada)

Genital morphology and the evolution of reproductive modes in caecilian amphibians

All caecilian amphibians practice internal fertilization via a unique copulatory organ: the everted male
cloaca. Since the caecilian cloaca is ontogenetically a part of the digestive system it is not a separate
structure exclusively dedicated for reproduction, like e.g. the squamate hemipenis.          Nevertheless
complex and diverse morphologies have evolved that include different patterns of longitudinal ridges,
tuberosities or crests, but also paired blind sacs. Previous morphological studies mostly concentrated on
the male cloaca. However, the true function of the intromittent organ during copulation, the presence of
corresponding female genital structures and general pattern and the evolution of characteristic species or
lineage-specific morphologies remain unclear. Here we present a comparative evolutionary study on
general and functional morphology aspects of the caecilian cloaca. Using specimens housed in natural
history museum collections we explore the cloacal anatomy of both sexes of several species representing
the major clades and reproductive modes by dissections and conventional histology combined with state
of art soft tissue SRµCT-scans. The results are interpreted within an evolutionary framework based on
most recent phylogenetic hypothesis, to check for gains and losses of specific genital morphologies. We
also test for sexual selection issues and if morphological patterns are linked to the highly variable
reproductive modes and levels of maternal care or other morphological aspects.

In summary the comparative investigation into the complex reproductive morphology of caecilians offers
great potential for the understanding of the evolution of vertebrate reproduction.




                                                                                                        394
Kuhnz, Linda (MBARI); Bizzarro, Joseph (University of Washington, Seattle, United States); David, Ebert
(Pacific Shark Research Center Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Moss Landing, United States)

In-situ Observation of Deep-living Skates in the Eastern North Pacific

We report on in-situ observations of more than 500 deep-sea skates from between 600 and 3,322 m
among a variety of locations, including: the Pacific Northwest, northern California, the Monterey Canyon,
central California seamounts, southern California basins, and the Gulf of California. Physical information
(i.e., geographic location, depth, habitat associations), and biological data (i.e., species, sex, maturity,
behavior) were evaluated. Multiple skates of an unknown species were observed below 3,000 m and
represent some of the deepest visual observations of skates. Several additional unidentified species were
observed. This study also extends the maximum depth range of Amblyraja badia, Bathyraja abyssicola,
and B. spinosissima.



Kume, Gen (Nagasaki University); Furumitsu, Keisuke (Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 3, Japan);
Yamaguchi, Atsuko (Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan)

Life history of fanray Platyrhina tangi in Ariake Bay, Japan

Growth, reproduction and feeding habits of fanray Platyrhina tangi were examined in Ariake Bay. Age
determination was conducted by vertebral centrum analysis using soft X-radiography. Annual band pair
deposition was determined by marginal increment and edge analyses. The von Bertalanffy growth model
best described the overall pattern of growth for both males and females (males L = 455.2, k = 0.56, t0 =
−1.09; females L = 555.8, k = 0.28, t0 = −1.77; L is the theoretical asymptotic total length in mm, k is the
growth rate coefficient and t0 is the theoretical time at zero length). The observed maximum ages were 5
years for males and 12 years for females.

Females reached sexual maturity at an older age and larger size than males [50% sexual maturity: male,
393 mm total length (TL) (2.1 years); female, 421 mm TL (2.9 years)]. The present data support a distinct
annual reproductive cycle for P. tangi. Parturition occurred from August to November followed
immediately by mating, ovulation and fertilization. Mature females become pregnant every year, and the
gestation period is almost 1 year. Fertilized uterine eggs without macroscopic embryonic development
were present throughout the annual reproductive cycle, indicating that the species utilizes embryonic
diapause as its reproductive strategy. Both reproductive tracts of females were functional, and fecundity
ranged from 1 to 12 with a mean of 6.0, increasing with TL.

Of 334 stomach specimens, 324 contained food and 10 (3.0%) were empty. Thirty-seven taxonomic
levels of prey were identified. The most common prey was shrimp, followed by fish and mysids. There
were no differences in the composition of the diet between sexes, but an ontogenetic dietary shift was
observed. Trophic level analysis revealed that trophic level increased with size; however, this species is
consistently a secondary consumer. Dental sexual dimorphism was also observed. Specifically, mature
males had much longer and sharper cusps than females and immature males. Since males and females
had similar diets, dental sexual dimorphism may be related to their reproductive behaviour.




                                                                                                        395
Kuo, Chi-Yun (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Irschick, Duncan (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States)

Lizard tail autotomy in a gradient of predation pressure: a field study of the common side-
blotched lizards Uta stansburiana

Antipredator traits often exhibit considerable variation among populations occupying different
geographical regions. As the level of antipredator responses should theoretically be fine-tuned to
predation pressure, antipredator traits presents an excellent model system to study the mechanisms that
drive phenotypic variation among populations. Autotomy is a striking example of a costly antipredator
strategy that exhibits extensive geographic variation. In this study, we explored the ecological mechanism
behind this variation by testing the hypothesis that the facility of autotomy varies among populations
under different predation intensities. Specifically, we tested whether the stimulus to induce autotomy will
be lower in individuals from high predation environments. To do so, we chose four Uta stansburiana
populations along a north-south transect (Arizona, Nevada, Oregon and Washington). We estimated
predation intensity using demographic data from the field and measured the threshold stimulus to induce
autotomy in each population. We then examined the relationship between the magnitude of predation
intensity and the threshold stimulus of autotomy among populations. A negative relationship will indicate
that the facility of autotomy responds to variation in predation intensity and therefore might be under
natural selection. On the contrary, a lack of variation in the threshold stimulus for autotomy suggests that
the facility of autotomy might not respond to predation and therefore might not evolve under different
predation regimes.



Kupfer, Alexander (University of Potsdam, Germany);

A brief review on recent discoveries in the golden age of caecilian biology

Traditionally the caecilian amphibians have been regarded the most poorly studied and least known major
group of vertebrates. About two thirds of caecilian species are categorized as ―Data Deficient‖ in recent
IUCN conservation assessments. However more recently we have seen major breakthroughs in
knowledge of caecilian biology, with remarkable discoveries including lunglessness, species biodiversity,
highly unusual reproductive modes, evolutionary relationships based on DNA sequences, functional
morphology and quantitative ecology. This talk will introduce into some of these major findings and how
they have been achieved but also tries to identify future research themes in the study of caecilian biology.



Kupfer, Alexander (University of Potsdam, Germany); Reinhard, Sandy (University of Jena, Germany,
Canada)

Life history evolution and sexual size dimorphism in newts and salamanders (Caudata:
Salamandridae): a comparative approach

Among amphibians the true salamanders and newts (Salamandridae) show an extraordinary diversity of
mating systems and reproductive strategies, i.e. favour aquatic or terrestrial reproduction, breed in lotic or
lentic waters, are either oviparous or viviparous and exhibit various interspecific trade-offs between
reproductive parameters. Sexual size dimorphism (SSD) indicates the difference in body size of mature
organisms, already described by Charles Darwin for salamanders. The presence of SSD often correlates
with a distinct adaptation to reproductive roles or ecology, whereas natural and sexual selection show
their effects. We have collected and reviewed current available data and analysed the evolution of life



                                                                                                          396
histories and SSD using a comparative phylogenic approach. Female biased SSD seem to prevail in
most aquatic breeders but male biased SSD has evolved at least in three clades both in lentic and lotic
habitats. Moreover a positive correlation between egg size and larval size, as well as between clutch size
and female body size supports a fecundity driven evolution of body size in lentic breeders.



Kurabayashi, Atsushi (Hiroshima University); Matsui, Masafumi (Graduate School of Human and
Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 32, Japan); Belabut, Daicus; Hoi-Sen, Yong (Institute of
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia); Ahmad,
Norhayati (Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Selangor, Malaysia); Sudin, Ahmad (Institute for Tropical Biology and Conservation, University Malaysia
Sabah, Sabah, Malaysia); Kuramoto, Mitsuru (Fukuoka University of Education, Munakata, 46, Japan);
Hamidy, Amir (Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto, 32, Japan); Sumida,
Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-
hiroshima, 40, Japan)

From Antarctica or Asia? New colonization scenario for Australian-New Guinean narrow mouth
toads suggested from the findings on a mysterious genus Gastrophrynoides

Microhylidae is a geographically widespread family of anurans. Although several extensive molecular
analyses have attempted to elucidate their subfamilial relationships, and correlate these with Mesozoic
and Cenozoic continental drifts, consensus has not been reached. Further, generic level relationships
have not been well investigated in some microhylid subfamilies, and therefore subfamilial affiliations of
some genera are still unclear. To re-examine the subfamilial relationship of microhylids, to elucidate the
phylogenetic positions of two mysterious Asian genera, Gastrophrynoides and Phrynella, and to better
understand the trans-continental distributions of microhylid taxa, we performed molecular phylogenetic
and dating analyses using the largest molecular dataset (7164 nucleotide sites and ~ 52 microhylids)
applied to these taxa to date. We newly sequenced six nuclear genes and two mitochondrial (mt) genes
(approximately 8 kbp) from 22 microhylid frogs from eight subfamilies. The maximum likelihood and
Bayesian analyses resulted in the following phylogenetic information. (1) The recent view of the sister
relationship of Microhylidae and Afrobatrachia is disputable. (2) The subfamilial relationship of microhylids
suggested so far could be narrowed down to three alternatives. (3) Generic relationships of microhylines
were largely elucidated, excluding the positions of Chaperina, Micryletta, and Kaloula . (4) Although two
previous studies estimated different divergence ages for microhylid subfamilies, our estimated ages were
similar to the older one. Remarkably, our results clearly showed that one of two problematic Asian
genera, Phrynella , was nested in the clade of the Asian subfamily Microhylinae. By contrast,
Gastrophrynoides      occupied the most basal position of the Australian-New Guinean subfamily
Asterophryinae. The estimated divergence of            Gastrophrynoides from other asterophryine was
unexpectedly around 50 million years ago.         Although a colonization scenario via Antarctica to the
Australian-New Guinean landmass has been suggested for Asterophryinae, our finding suggested a novel
colonization route via Indo-Eurasia.




                                                                                                         397
Kurita, Kazuki (Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University); Hikida, Tsutomu
(Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan)

Island Colonization and Speciation of the Ryukyu Five-Lined Skink, Plestiodon marginatus, in the
Ryukyu Archipelago, Japan.

Oversea dispersal is one of the most important processes in the island colonization of many reptile taxa.
Here we obtained phylogeographic evidence for two cases of long oversea dispersals in Ryukyu five-lined
skink, Plestiodon marginatus. The Ryukyu Archipelago is located between Taiwan and the Japanese
main islands and divided into five island groups from south to north: the Yaeyama, Miyako, Okinawa,
Amami, and Tokara Groups. Three species of Plestiodon in East Asia have been recognized as a
monophyletic group: P. elegans from Taiwan and continental China, P. stimpsonii from the Yaeyama
Group, and P. marginatus from the Okinawa, Amami, and southern Tokara Groups. Previous studies
suggested that the populations from the islands of the northern Tokara Group resulted from the
colonization of P. marginatus by oversea dispersals. However, colonization routes, diversification periods,
and relationships among these populations have remained unclear. Phylogenetic analysis of the
populations of P. marginatus and its relatives based on a part of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
showed that there were three distinct clades in the phylogeny. The first clade consisted of the populations
of P. m. oshimensis from the islands of the Amami Group (except for two southern islands) and the
southern Tokara Groups, and Suwanosejima Island in the northern Tokara Group. The second clade
included the populations from P. m. marginatus from the islands of the Okinawa Group, two southern
islands of the Amami Group, and Nakanoshima Island in the northern Tokara Group. The last clade
comprised P. elegans from Taiwan, P. stimpsonii from the Yaeyama Group, and the population from
Kuchinoshima Island in the northern Tokara Group. Thus, the populations from three islands in the
northern Tokara Group were derived from different sources. Furthermore, these populations diverged
during the Pleistocene after the island formations of the northern Tokara Group. In the Pleistocene, the
Kuroshio current entered the East China Sea between Taiwan and the Yaeyama Group, and flowed out
through the Tokara Group. This suggests that the ancestral populations from three islands of the northern
Tokara Group could have been carried by the Kuroshio current. The geographic distances between three
islands of the northern Tokara Group and the islands of the source populations are ca. 50 km
(Suwanosejima Island), ca. 400 km (Nakanoshima Island), and ca. 850 km (Kuchinsohima Island).



Kuriyama, Takeo (Toho University); Morimoto, Gen (Rikkyo University, Canada); Miyaji, Kazuyuki;
Sugimoto, Masazumi; Hasegawa, Masami (Toho University, Canada)

Pigment cells producing geographic anti-predator color variation of lizard, Plestiodon latiscutatus.

Body coloration of animals conveys visual signals both for the intraspecific and interspecific
communications. Coloration of prey animals suffers greater survival selection if it is for predator
avoidance than for intraspecific communication, such that survival functions of prey coloration have been
the subjects of many evolutionary biologists. However, few studies explicitly identified species that incur
selection pressures to enhance evolution of defensive coloration, primarily because it is often difficult to
detect specific prey–predator combinations with tight co-evolutionary relationships within complex web of
species. Furthermore, in order to have comprehensive understanding of proximate and ultimate
mechanisms of prey color evolution, we have to quantitatively evaluate how predators perceive and
recognize prey visual signals, have to know histological and physiological mechanisms of pigment cells
producing specific color pattern, and finally have to reconstruct history of evolutionary process.




                                                                                                        398
 Here we investigated evolution of defensive tail blue coloration of the insular lizard populations with a
hypothesis that tail coloration evolved to avoid specific predators with different color vision by integrating
predators‘ color vision, light reflectance of prey body, pigment cell mechanism producing various
coloration, and phylogeographical reconstruction of lizard-predator relationships. We selected the oceanic
island system of the Izu Islands and the adjacent Izu Peninsula as study sites, because proceeding
ecological studies already have revealed which types of predators are the major predators of the
respective island populations of the lizards, as lower insular biological diversity aided us to identify prey-
predator interactions much easier than continental situations.

 The lizard, Plestiodon latiscutatus, endemic to the Izu Islands and peninsula, showed marked
geographical color variation in terms of vividness of body stripe and blue tail, in which color pattern varied
coincidently with predator fauna (carnivore mammals, snakes and birds) of the islands. The lizards of
Peninsula type have vivid stripe and blue tail on the Izu peninsula and Oh-shima, where three types of
predators, carnivore mammals (Mustera itatsi), diurnal snakes (Elaphe quadrivirgata), the insectivorous
birds (Turdus celaenops) are living with the lizards. The lizards of the Kozu type have less vivid body
stripe and tail with brown at base, green at middle and blue at tip on the islands where the snakes are
major predator. Finally, the lizards of the Hachijyo-kojima type have obscured body stripe and mostly
brown colored tail with faint blue at the distal end of the tail.



Kwun, Hyuck Joon (Pukyong National University); Kim, Jin Koo (Pukyong National University, Canada)

Phylogenetic position of the genera Eulophias and Zoarchias (Perciformes: Zoarcoidei) using
mitochondrial and nuclear DNAs

Suborder Zoarcoidei comprises 9 families and 105 genera, their taxonomic position is not clear because
of no diagnostic characters. Among them, the genera Eulophias Smith, 1902 and Zoarchias Jordan
and Snyder, 1902 are representative problematic groups. According to morphological and osteological
studies (Makushok, 1958, 1961), Eulophias belongs to the family Stichaeidae, but Zoarchias belongs to
the family Zoarcidae based on their caudal skeleton. Subsequently, Zoarchias moved to the family
Stichaeidae based on dorsal and anal fins structure, i.e., dorsal fin with many spines and many soft rays,
and anal fin with one spine and many soft rays. On the other hand, the family Zoarcidae members almost
have soft rays only in dorsal and anal fins (Anderson, 1994). Also, Zoarchias members are similar to the
family Stichaeidae than to the family Zoarcidae in having gill membranes free to isthmus and 2-3 epurals
(Anderson, 1994). Notwithstanding, these two genera still have taxonomic problems up to date (Nakabo,
2002; Mecklenburg and Sheiko, 2004). Therefore, in order to clarify taxonomic position of the two genera
( Eulophias and Zoarchias ) we analyzed mitochondrial and nuclear DNAs of two species, and also
compared with those of 23 species as outgroup.



Kyosoung, KOO (Jeju National University);

The effects of salty environment on the development of tadpoles of Japanese tree frog, Hyla
japonica

The study investigated the effects on the development of Japanese tree frog, Hyla japonica, by salty
environmental conditions such as the breeding site containing seawater by sea waves and wind. During
the reproduction season (early May to late July), the field survey was conducted in Geomun-do, the island
in Korea. Based on the survey, the Japanese tree frogs that are bigger than the frogs in other places and



                                                                                                          399
the tadpoles of the frogs inhabit in the abnormal water condition containing seawater were found. We
presumed that the salty circumstance brings both of positive and negative influences to the frogs. Two
kinds of breeding sites confirmed the habitation of the frogs and tadpoles were selected to determine the
effects of salty environment: (1) the water near shore including seawater; (2) fresh water in inside of the
island. The tadpoles in salty and fresh water have monitored in the discovered places of them. In the
laboratory, the containers with three conditions were arranged, and the tadpoles from salty and fresh
water were housed in each conditions; salty water, fresh water, aged tap water. During this study, the
time to the metamorphosis and the morphological changes of the tadpoles were estimated recorded.



LaBrecque, John (San Francisco State University); Clark, Brian (San Francisco State University, San
Francisco, United States)

Who's Your Daddy?: Multiple Paternity is a derived reproductive strategy and a synapomorphy for
the Embiotocidae (surfperches)

The Spotfin Surfperch Hyperprosopon anale and the shiner surfperch Cymatogaster aggregata,
(Embiotocidae), are viviparous fishes that exhibit a unique reproductive strategy. Unlike most fishes
Embiotocids give birth to a relatively few number live offspring; a costly parental investment. Therefore,
having multiple paternity would be an important tactic for maximizing fitness and genetic diversity. Two of
13 Embiotocid genera have been shown to use multiple paternity as a reproductive strategy. In order to
infer whether multiple paternity is a general strategy of all Embiotocid surfperches, it is crucial to examine
members of the basal group, which consists of the genera Amphistichus and Hyperprosopon (subfamily
Amphistinae). Of these, Hyperprosopon anale, the spotfin surfperch is the most ancestral taxon. We
found that Hyperprosopon exhibit multiple paternity with a varying number of sires per brood. In addition,
we compared aspects of this strategy including number of sires and offspring per brood in a northern
population of Cymatogaster with data from a previous study of a southern population.



LaDuc, Travis (The University of Texas at Austin); Christiansen, James (The University of Texas at
Austin, Canada)

Should I stay or should I go? Temporal persistence and activity of Kinosternon flavescens (Yellow
Mud Turtle) in permanent tanks in the Chihuahuan Desert

Even slight differences in the timing and amount of rainfall can have tremendous effects on desert-
adapted turtle species. Since 2006, we have studied a population of Kinosternon        flavescens (Yellow
Mud Turtle) across a 31 square km section of a private ranch in the Chihuahuan Desert (Jeff Davis Co.,
TX) using mark-recapture techniques as well as radio telemetry. We focused our efforts on four perennial
windmill-fed cattle tanks, trapping tanks 4-6 times between May and October, and marking over 300
turtles to date. Sex ratios were female-biased; male turtles grow faster and larger than female turtles.
Turtles do not overwinter in the tanks, instead returning to the water in May and June, and remaining
inthe tank as late as September. Variation and/or delays in summer rains have the potential of shifting
reproduction and movements of turtles at tanks separated by as little as 7 km. At the largest tank, less
than 10% of the turtles were captured for five consecutive seasons. The presence and temporal
persistence of turtles in the tanks during a given active season varied greatly, with some turtles captured
only once during a season but others captured multiple times. This presence and persistence in captures
varied between the sexes as well as between populations at different tanks with the correlations between
these captures and precipitation patterns to be discussed. Recruitment, based on the presence of second



                                                                                                          400
calendar year or younger turtles, was highly variable as well, again differing between tanks and years.
Radio telemetry revealed additional information about the timing of movements in adults, particularly
those movements to and from the water during the active season.



Lahti, Megan (Arizona Western College); Brodie, Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada)

Morphological Variation of Dwarfed Populations of Short-horned Lizards and Great Plains Toads
in the San Luis Valley, Colorado

Morphological measurements are reported for dwarfed populations of short-horned lizards and Great
Plains toads inhabiting an isolated valley in south-central Colorado (the Valley). Since the initial reporting
in 1968, no studies have investigated the extent or degree of body size reduction in these presumably
isolated populations. Using both museum and live specimens, 16 morphological features of adult toads
(n = 92 museum, 139 live) and 27 morphological features of adult lizards (n = 103 museum, 73 live) were
measured. Females and males of both species were significantly smaller than their non-valley
counterparts (p &lt; 0.05); Valley toads were 34% smaller than non-Valley populations while Valley
lizards are 30% smaller. Valley populations of both species are disproportionately dwarfed compared to
populations adjacent to the Valley including significantly smaller head lengths in lizards (p = 0.0004) and
significantly smaller head widths, parotoid lengths, and head lengths in toads (p &lt; 0.09). A MANCOVA
indicates that there is a both a locality and sex effect on the morphologies of both species (p &lt; 0.001)
and a sex*locality interaction for toads (p =0.04).        The morphological uniqueness among dwarfed
populations of lizards and toads provides insight into the effects of their presumed isolation within the
Valley, such as implications towards potential variation in their life/natural- histories and genetic diversity.



Lamarre, Philippe (University of Montreal); Angers, Bernard (University of Montreal, Canada); Réale,
Denis; Milot, Emmanuel (UQAM, Canada)

Men, snakes and islands; impact of fragmented landscapes on the genetic organization of two
colubrid species.

The Montreal metropolitan community includes numerous islands located at the confluence of the Saint-
Lawrence and Ottawa Rivers. In such a fragmented landscape, dispersal of animals is limited by the
distance between islands. Similarly, populations within the strongly urbanised Montreal Island are
separated by increasing stretches of poor or inhospitable habitats, affecting both dispersal and population
size. This study seeks to assess the effects of these factors by comparing the organization of genetic
diversity, using microsatellite markers, of two highly distinct snake species. The common garter snake ( T.
sirtalis ) has a high dispersal ability and should thus be less influenced by insularity. Consequently, global
diversity between islands and continent is expected to be similar and differentiation among insular
populations low. On the other hand, Dekay‘s brown snake ( S. dekayi ) is specialized in open and recently
disrupted habitats and its population size should then be less impacted by human perturbations. As a
result, differentiation between populations in disturbed and undisturbed areas is expected to be similar,
whereas the opposite should be observable in T. sirtalis . This study is designed to provide a
comprehensive picture of the impacts of human activities on both dispersal and population size in snakes.




                                                                                                            401
Lambert, Max (Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies);

Microhabitat use by turtles in a highly modified waterway: will removing introduced red-eared
sliders alter basking behavior of threated western pond turtles?

Western pond turtles ( Emys=Actinemys marmorata ) are California‘s only native aquatic turtle species.
Western pond turtles are declining throughout their range but maintain dense and seemingly healthy
populations in developed habitat. Red-eared sliders ( Trachemys scripta elegans ) have been distributed
throughout the world due to the pet trade and are considered the most widely introduced reptile in the
world. Although sliders are viewed as a problem species there has been little documentation of their
effect on native turtle populations. We measured both varying (e.g., visibility and human disturbance) and
also non-varying (e.g., slope and substrate) characteristics of 24 basking sites in a highly modified
northern California waterway. From 2009-2010 we surveyed each species‘ presence at all sites. We
found that a higher frequency of human disturbance, shallower slopes, deeper water adjacent to the
basking site, and a steel mesh substrate were all associated with higher relative abundance of the
introduced sliders. This study indicates that the two species are using habitat differently in this highly
modified waterway but cannot distinguish between competitive exclusion and species-specific habitat
preference as the cause of these differences. In the summer of 2011 we removed most of the red-eared
sliders from the waterway and are now assessing if pond turtles alter basking behavior in response to the
slider removal. By treating slider removal as a large-scale experimental treatment, we hope to determine
the response of pond turtles in the next few years.



Lana, Fernanda (Federal Rural University of Pernambuco); Hazin, Fábio; Oliveira, Paulo; Rego, Mariana;
Roque, Pollyana (Federal Rural University of Pernambuco, Canada)

Reproductive Biology, Relative Abundance and Distribution of Silky Shark, Carcharhinus
falciformis (Muller & Henle, 1939), in the Southwestern and Equatorial Atlantic Ocean

The present work aimed at studying the ecology of the silky shark, Carcharhinus falciformis , including
aspects of its reproduction, relative abundance, distribution, habitat use and migration in the Equatorial
Atlantic Ocean. From November 1992 to December 2011, 153 specimens were examined, 72 males and
81 females, resulting in a sex ratio close to 1:1 (0.89:1.00). All specimens were caught by commercial
tuna longline boats, in the area located between the latitudes of the 008°N to 053°S and longitudes 008°E
to 048°W. The results suggest a size at first maturity for females around 205- 210 cm and for males
between 180- 205 cm TL. Females were found in 5 maturational stages: juvenile (n = 29/ 35.8% from 74 -
204 cm, TL), maturing (n = 10 / 12.3%, from 215 - 295 cm TL), pre- ovulatory (n = 14 / 17.3%, 177 - 280
cm TL), pregnant (n = 24 / 29.6%, 203 - 270 cm TL) and resting (n = 4 / 4.9%, from 223 - 285 cm TL).
Males were classified into 4 stages: juvenile (n = 38/ 52.8% from 81 - 220 cm TL and clasper length - CL
&lt;12 cm), maturing (n = 16/ 22.2%, from 166 - 208 TL cm, 9.5 - 24.5 cm CL;), adult (n = 17/ 23.6%, from
141 - 272 cm TL, CL&gt; 24.5 cm) and neonate (n = 1/ 1.4%, 82 cm TL, CL 4 cm). The ovarian fecundity
ranged from 2 to 60 follicles and uterine fecundity from 7 to 25 embryos. The distribution and relative
abundance were analyzed based on catch and effort data from 16.016 sets made by Brazilian tuna
longliners, from 2004 to 2011. The area with the highest concentration was located between latitudes
005ºN and 020ºS and between longitudes 020ºE and 040ºW. The proportion of silky sharks in relation to
the total catch in numbers and catches of sharks in general, equal to 0.2% and 6.4%, respectively, were
very low, showing the character of their incidental catches. The habitat preferences and their distribution
in depth, temperature ranges and vertical movement, were analyzed using PSAT tags (Pop-up Satellite
Archival Tag) in the vicinity of Archipelago of Saint Peter and Saint Paul – ASPSP. Two males of silky




                                                                                                       402
sharks of 130 cm and 100 cm TL each were tagged with PSAT programmed to remain in the animal for
73 days collecting data. The preferred temperature range displayed by the species was between 27 - 28°
C with a preferred depth between 1 - 10m, showing a markedly shallow distribution for the species. The
animals also exhibited a marked superficial behavior during the day and a little deeper at night.



Landler, Lukas (Virginia Tech / University of Vienna); Gollmann, Günter (University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria)

Magnetic orientation of the Common Toad: establishing an arena approach for adult anurans

Background

Magnetic orientation is a taxonomically widespread phenomenon in the animal kingdom, but has been
little studied in anuran amphibians. We collected Common Toads ( Bufo bufo ) during their migration
towards their spawning pond and tested them shortly after displacement for possible magnetic orientation
in arena experiments. Animals were tested in two different set-ups, in the geomagnetic field and in a
reversed magnetic field. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study testing orientation of adult
anurans with a controlled magnetic field of a known strength and alignment.

Results

After displacement, toads oriented themselves unimodally under the geomagnetic field, following their
former migration direction (d-axis). When the magnetic field was reversed, the distribution of bearings
changed from a unimodal to a bimodal pattern, but still along the d-axis. The clustering of bearings was
only significant after the toads reached the outer circle, 60.5 cm from their starting point. At a virtual inner
circle (diameter 39 cm) and at the start of the experiment, orientation of toads did not show any significant
pattern.

Conclusions

The experimental set-up used in our study is suitable to test orientation behaviour of the Common Toad.
We speculate that toads had not enough time to relocate their position on an internal map. Hence, they
followed their former migration direction. Bimodality in orientation when exposed to the reversed magnetic
field could be the result of a cue conflict, between magnetic and possibly celestial cues. For maintaining
their migration direction toads use, at least partly, the geomagnetic field as a reference system.



Lang, Jeffrey (Gharial Conservation Alliance);

Gharial Ecology on the Chambal River, North India

Following a die-off (&gt;100 animals) of Gavialis gangeticus in winter 2007-08, ecological and behavioral
studies were initiated on the resident breeding population in the lower Chambal River, near the Yamuna
confluence. Over 4 yrs, individual gharial (11f:9m; 2-3.5m totl) have been tracked via radio telemetry at
daily/weekly intervals, and the distribution and abundance of gharials of all size/age classes have been
monitored weekly/monthly. Local observers, traveling by motorbike/on foot, have documented the
seasonal movements and behavioral ecology, particularly during breeding, of free-living adults and
subadults in an open, dynamic river system subject to monsoonal flooding and periodic drought.
Individual gharial exhibited well-defined, predictable residency patterns that varied seasonally. Most



                                                                                                            403
frequented 5-15km of river length, inhabiting an upstream segment in low water/dry season, and a
downstream area during the monsoon. Some made exceptional, long-distance seasonal movements (80-
140km+), moving downstream with high water, and returning upstream 3-6 months later. To date, the
resident population under study appears to be healthy, and the size/age distribution of animals indicate
annual breeding and hatchling recruitment.      Behavioral interactions of adults and young have been
observed and photographed during hatching, immediately post-hatching, and throughout the first year for
young. Male and female gharial guard and defend incubating eggs and newly hatched young from
predators. Close associations of yearlings with each other (at 9 months of age) and with attending adults
suggest that parental care continues through the first year of life. In gharial, biparental care, and in
particular paternal defense of young, may be the usual condition for this unique crocodilian lineage.
These studies are directly relevant to management /conservation strategies, and also of interest in
understanding the ecology and evolution of parental care in crocodilians.



Langhammer, Penny (Arizona State University); Burrowes, Patricia (University of Puerto Rico, San
Juan, PR, United States); Bryant, Anna (Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States); Lips, Karen
(University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United States); Collins, James (Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, United States)

Chytridiomycosis in a direct-developing frog: ontogenetic variation in susceptibility, pathogen
transmission, and population-level impacts of the amphibian chytrid fungus in Eleutherodactylus
coqui

The Caribbean is a hotspot of amphibian decline, with nearly 75% of species threatened with extinction.
Three species of direct-developing frogs went extinct on Puerto Rico in recent decades, and the pathogen
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), which causes chytridiomycosis, is a suspected cause. Long-term
field data indicate that extant species are also declining, including Eleutherodactylus coqui. In theory,
extinction from infectious disease can occur if disease-induced mortality is significant and pathogen
transmission is maintained despite low host densities. In Central America direct-developing species are
among those that survive epidemic waves of chytridiomycosis. Their persistence may be related to a
lower dependency on water bodies, resulting in reduced pathogen growth and transmission. We studied
the ontogenetic susceptibility of the direct-developing Eleutherodactylus coqui to Bd. We also estimated
the rate of Bd transmission to test if direct (animal-to-animal) and indirect (environment-to-animal)
transmission occurs in a terrestrial species. We exposed adult and juvenile (6-21 weeks in age) E. coqui
frogs to Bd under identical conditions, and monitored morbidity, mortality, and recovery over 11 weeks.
Juvenile frogs exposed to Bd had lower survival than control froglets or adults, while most adults were
able to clear infection rapidly. Through a series of experiments, we discovered that the rate of Bd
transmission is low, but indirect transmission does occur: frogs can become infected by using a habitat
previously inhabited by an infected frog. Juvenile coqui frogs have higher Bd infection prevalence and
intensity than adults, and our work has shown that they are more susceptible to mortality from disease.
This ontogenetic difference in susceptibility has important implications for frog populations in the
Caribbean: endemic Bd can lead to reduced recruitment by reducing survival of juveniles, even if adults
are relatively resistant or tolerant. We will use the data on transmission and susceptibility to develop and
analyze a stage-structured disease model to explore the population-level outcomes of chytridiomycosis
on direct-developing frogs.




                                                                                                        404
Langhorne, Cecilia (Mississippi State University); Calatayud, Natalie; Rowlison, Tricia (Mississippi State
University, Mississippi State, United States); Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo, Memphis, TN, United
States); Vance, Carrie; Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, United States)

Short-term cold storage and cryopreservation of boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas) sperm

Natural breeding can be difficult to initiate in captive populations of threatened amphibians, such as the
southern Rocky Mountain boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas), and exogenous hormone protocols have
been established to bypass unknown environmental cues and stimulate gamete release and breeding.
However, asynchronous sperm-egg release is still a problem and can reduce fertilisation potential. Thus,
alternative means for storing sperm short-term (2-5 days) or in long-term genetic resource banks for in-
vitro fertilisation would improve the number of tadpoles that could be produced and released into the wild.
The objectives of this study were to: 1) explore the potential for short-term storage of spermic urine at
4˚C, and 2) develop an optimal long-term storage solution by establishing a successful cryopreservation
protocol for boreal toad sperm. Preliminary studies in this species identified the hormone human chorionic
gonadotrophin (hCG), at a dose of 10 IU/g, as effective in promoting spermiation, with peak sperm
concentration between 3 and 7 hours post-hormone administration (PA). Spermic urine samples were
collected at 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12 and 24 hours PA and the following sperm parameters were measured:
percent motility, percent forward motility and quality of forward movement. Samples with sperm motility
greater than 67% were selected and stored at 4˚C for up to 14 days and motility parameters measured
daily. Mean percent motility decreased by 13% over the first 24 hours, 40% by day 7, and by day 14 had
reduced to 11%, while forward progression was maintained up to an average of 8 days. We are currently
testing the toxicity of a number of penetrating cryoprotective agents by incubating with spermic urine at
4˚C for 1, 5, 10 and 20 minutes and analysing subsequent motility parameters. In addition, we hope to
report on optimisation of cooling and thawing rates to ascertain the most effective conditions for sperm
freezing and recovery. Protocol efficacies will be assessed by evaluating membrane integrity and post-
thaw analysis of sperm motility parameters. The ability to maintain viable sperm in cold storage not only
provides a means of sperm transportation between captive assurance colonies but also allows for the
preservation of genetic material and storage of unique genes for the long term conservation of the boreal
toad.



Langkilde, Tracy (Penn State University);

Invasive species management viewed through an evolutionary lens: lessons from Fire Ants

Billions of dollars are spent each year on the management of invasive species in the United States alone.
Mitigation is typically based on effects of invaders on native species, usually soon after introduction.
Efforts to protect native taxa from ―unnecessary‖ perturbations are though to increase their ability to
survive future impacts. Long-term effects of invaders are poorly known, but likely to be critical when
prioritizing management strategies. Red imported Fire Ants (Solenopsis invicta) act simultaneously as
predators and venomous prey upon native species, including the Eastern Fence Lizard (Sceloporus
undulatus). Adult lizards from fire ant invaded sites are faced with strong within-lifetime selection for anti-
predator behavior and have evolved longer legs, which allow them to avoid encounters and escape fire
ant attack. Juvenile lizards are most vulnerable to fire ants as toxic prey, because they are stung inside
the mouth as they eat these invasive ants. Juveniles have evolved to avoid eating fire ants, but acquire a
―taste‖ for fire ants as adults. Newly invaded lizard populations are therefore likely to be strongly
impacted by fire ants, but quickly adapt to survive this threat. This research reveals that evolutionary and
lifetime exposure to threats posed by global change can interact in complex ways to shape adaptive




                                                                                                           405
responses. Ensuring native species have the capacity to evolutionarily respond to threats can be
important for facilitating their survival of future perturbations.



Lannoo, Michael (Indiana University School of Medicine);

Ethics and values in amphibian conservation in the United States

Across most of the United States, amphibians have not shown they carry the economic or emotional clout
to save amphibians. Therefore amphibian conservation biologists should consider increasing efforts to
join forces with other groups holding shared interests. Many candidate cooperative groups are oriented
around game and fish, which are commercially important and have been able to weather the policies of
both sides in the current malevolent bipolar political climate in this country. Such groups would offer hope
for amphibians in all areas of the country, and in all political climates, not just those favoring
environmental interests. However, game and fish policies favoring amphibians have not generally been
formalized; such practices currently depend on the interests, values, and ethics of individual land
managers. In lieu of yet more legislation, establishing a new ethic that recognizes amphibians as critical
components of most American ecosystems would go far towards conserving amphibians. Here I use an
example from our recent work on Crawfish Frogs ( Lithobates areolatus ) to show how engaging land
managers can promote amphibian conservation outside of formal institutional policies and practices in a
region of the country not known for its progressive politics.



Lardner, Bjorn (Colorado State University); Savidge, Julie (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
United States); Reed, Robert; Rodda, Gordon (U.S. Geological Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States)

A telemetry-based method for measuring animal activity

Radio transmitters for animal telemetry can be built to incorporate a mercury switch that causes the signal
to change from a fast pulse rate to a slow pulse rate depending on how the transmitter is oriented. But the
lack of signal change is not evidence that the animal did not move, because not all movements cause the
switch to tip. We tried to increase the reliability of information on activity in juvenile Brown Treesnakes
(Boiga irregularis) by analyzing, with the sound analysis program Avisoft SAS Lab Pro, not just pulse rate
but also the signal amplitude received and recorded (with a <$100 digital recorder) at a fixed station. We
exploited the fact that the transmitter‘s antenna orientation relative to the receiving antenna affects the
strength of the signal received. Also the structure and density of vegetation between the transmittered
animal and the receiver will cause variation in received signal amplitude when an animal travels through a
heterogeneous habitat. There are commercially available data loggers that automate collection of this
type of data, but they can be quite expensive – especially if more than one logger is required (as when
multiple animals located far from each other are simultaneously tracked). Our solution is comparably
cheap, but more labor intensive. However, we believe our method can extract more data, or data of better
quality, than can commercial logging stations, because we have the ability to tailor the signal detection
settings afterwards. Doing so, we can optimize the delicate tradeoff between failing to detect transmitter
signals (signal discrimination threshold set too high) versus registering excessive background radio
frequency noise (threshold set too low). We describe field recording obstacles that we experienced;
provide pros and cons of different software analysis workflows; show how pulse rate data compare to
amplitude data; and visualize how weather station data can be aligned with activity diagrams. We note
that those who work on very small animals, requiring the most lightweight possible transmitters (e.g. 0.35




                                                                                                        406
g), might be able to use amplitude data alone to avoid the additional weight (0.4 – 0.5 g) inflicted by
inclusion of a position-sensitive switch with the transmitter.



Lardner, Bjorn (Colorado State University); Rodda, Gordon; Yackel Adams, Amy (U.S. Geological
Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States); Savidge, Julie (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
United States); Reed, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States)

Detection rates of geckos in visual encounter surveys: Turning confounding variables into useful
knowledge

Visual encounter surveys without capture-mark-recapture are prone to generate population size indices
suffering from an unknown bias because survey conditions differ in time and space. Knowledge of
variables that cause such variation, and the size of their effects, can be used to guide the collection of
relevant survey covariates, correct survey data, or anticipate situations where bias might be unacceptably
large. Adjusting for these ‗nuisance‘ variables can simultaneously help shed light on the ecology of the
target species. We used negative binomial regression to evaluate confounding variables for a data set
where 220-meter long transects were surveyed at night, on 9,475 occasions, for invasive Brown
Treesnakes (Boiga irregularis) and – as a by-product – their gecko prey (primarily Hemidactylus frenatus
and Lepidodactylus lugubris). Searchers differed substantially in gecko detection rates with the most
extreme pairwise comparisons differing by a factor of six. Detection rates with the worst and the best
headlamp differed by a factor of at least two. More geckos were seen during wet weather conditions, but
the effect size was small. Strong winds had a negative effect on sightings, and the wind effect is
potentially as large as those of searchers or headlamps. The moon phase caused 14% more gecko
sightings when contrasting a detection-rate peak (waning and new moon) to a detection-rate dip (a few
nights prior to full moon). The latter result was obtained when simultaneously adjusting for whether or not
the moon was above the horizon at the time of the focal transect survey, which had an additive effect
corresponding to 11%. Fitting a sine function to data suggested that the gecko population size was 24%
higher at the end of the wet season than at the end of the dry season. There was also strong support for
more long-term population fluctuations. The various factors influencing gecko counts are likely to play a
role in nocturnal surveys of many cryptic species. While some factors can be addressed well with
measured covariates, others will be difficult to eliminate as a significant source of error in long-term
monitoring programs.



Larson, Derek (University of Toronto); Evans, David (Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, Canada)

Tooth variation in Varanus komodoensis

Establishing the range of intraspecific variation of taxonomically informative characters is essential when
recognizing species based on morphological characters. In fossil datasets, this information is often
lacking due to restricted sample sizes of individuals of a known species, with many fossil vertebrates
known only from a single individual. Varanus komodoensis , as the largest extant lizard and the largest
living animal with xiphodont (latterally compressed, serrated) teeth, has often been used in
palaeobiological studies as a model for theropod dinosaurs in terms of feeding behaviour and tooth and
jaw biomechanics. Here we use V. komodoensis to illustrate the range in variation in the teeth of an
extant xiphodont faunivore. Fifteen skulls of reproductively adult Varanus komodoensis were measured
to evaluate the degree of morphological variation present in the species. Nineteen linear skull
measurements were taken, and three gross tooth measurements as well as mesial and distal tooth



                                                                                                       407
denticle size were measured for each of ten teeth across the tooth rows. Tooth counts vary little among
specimens, the smallest specimens having one fewer dentary tooth positions than the largest skulls, but
maxillary and premaxillary tooth counts remaining identical. Denticle size and tooth width in regionally
equivalent teeth also remain essentially constant across the size ranges even though tooth length and
height increase approximately proportionally to skull size. These findings suggest that some aspects of
tooth morphology are remarkably consistent between individuals and robust to differences in body size.
Comparison of multiple individuals indicates the potential of diagnostic characters in teeth. The presence
of consistent measurements at the same tooth position in individuals differing in size also suggests the
possibility of identifying tooth position consistently based on tooth morphology. These results have
implications for the study of theropod dinosaurs, as most of our knowledge of the abundance and
diversity of these animals comes from the description of isolated teeth. These results are important for
understanding the role this variation plays in the functional morphology.



Larson, Shawn (Seattle Aquarium); Griffing, Denise; Hollander, Joel; Christiansen, Jeff (Seattle
Aquarium, Canada)

Summary of sixgill shark tagging and abundance estimates from 2003-2009 in the urban inland
waters of Elliott Bay, Seattle

Anecdotal reports of diver-shark encounters in the Pacific Northwest stimulated interest in the normally
deep-dwelling, poorly studied bluntnose sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) and the reason for its
presence in the shallow waters of the Salish Sea. Capture/Mark/ Recapture techniques were used to
identify individual sharks for population structure and movement pattern analysis. Temporal changes in
relative abundance in Puget Sound are reported from a controlled study site (2003-2005) at the Seattle
Aquarium and citizen sighting/encounter reports (2000-2009). At the Seattle Aquarium study site on Elliott
Bay, Seattle, 45 sixgills were tagged with modified Floy visual marker tags, along with an estimated 116
additional untagged sixgills observed via video camera.          The majority of sixgills observed were
adolescents, and they were found to be significantly more abundant in the summer months. Observations
of sixgills peaked in 2003-2005 and declined to very few observations from 2006-2009. While
conservation measures have been enacted in Washington and British Columbia waters, additional
measures may be necessary as large, long-lived sharks like sixgills are thought to be unable to sustain
exploitation.



Lattanzio, Matthew (Ohio University); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

Functional consequences of disturbance for tree lizards: Integrating isotopic evidence from
multiple trophic levels

Changes in resource diversity and number, mediated by trophic interactions, ultimately shape species
responses to disturbance. At the heart of the species response to these changes is the individual stress
response to the disturbance itself: to disperse, adapt, or go extinct. For many individuals, the most viable
option is to adapt, which usually requires some level of plasticity in trophic (functional) relationships. In
arid grassland habitats of the southwestern US, prescribed fire is a common practice intended to mimic
historical episodes of wildfire and maintain ecosystem structure and function. However, the changes to
the environment incurred by this disturbance mimic those predicted by recent models of climate change:
an increase and spread of grass cover and non-native grass species. The functional consequences of
this structural reorganization of dominant vegetation types remain unknown. Here we model changes in



                                                                                                         408
habitat and trophic linkages during a three-year period in southeastern Arizona. We monitor three study
sites: an unburned control, and two treatment sites varying in burn frequency. As predicted, these sites
differ significantly in resource distributions, with grass cover positively associated with burn frequency
(Analysis of Similarities, Global R=0.45, P<0.05). We focus on ornate tree lizards (Urosaurus ornatus), a
meso-predator, and model trophic linkages at each site using stable isotope analysis. Our analyses
involve mixing models of carbon and nitrogen isotopes based on tissues from multiple trophic levels (i.e.,
primary producers, arthropod consumers, and lizards). We provide a synergistic model of the functional
consequences of disturbance for lizard species that can inform future studies and conservation efforts
alike.



Lattanzio, Matthew (Ohio University); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Canada)

Habitat use, phenotypic variation, and grazing: The responses of tree lizard populations to altered
landscapes

A major question in ecology is how the stress-responses of organisms to habitat disturbance affect
population dynamics. Because disturbance alters the distribution of resources (e.g., structural and
dietary), organisms that use those resources likely have to adjust their habitat preferences in disturbed
regions to satisfy energetic and social (e.g., territorial) demands. Moreover, offspring reared in disturbed
environments may differ in a variety of phenotypic traits, including morphology and performance
capabilities, from those in undisturbed environments.         Ranchland grazing is a common land
management practice in the arid southwestern US, yet its acute and chronic effects on wildlife remain
largely unknown. The mosaic of disturbed and unaltered patches created by grazing thus provides an
opportunity to link the stress response of reptiles with population persistence in a fragmented landscape.
Here we expand on a project begun during 2009 evaluating the phenotypic responses of tree lizard (
Urosaurus ornatus ) populations to land management practices in Arizona by presenting data from grazed
and unaltered sites in the Malpai borderlands area of Cochise County, Arizona. Results from six sites will
be presented: four grazed and two unaltered sites. Preliminary analyses highlight strong structural
variation among grazed and unaltered sites (ANOSIM, Global R = 0.276, P&lt;0.001), which is expected
to translate into variation in habitat use by tree lizards. We will analyze lizard habitat use with spatially-
explicit models to account for variation in the available environmental matrix at each site. Because these
lizards are polymorphic (associated with primary throat coloration), we will compare intra-specific
dynamics in habitat use as well. We will frame our habitat use results in the context of disturbance but
also with reference to morphological (in both size and color expression) and performance (endurance)
variation across sites. In this manner, we will be able to delineate how changes in the landscape as a
result of disturbance influence phenotypic integration by small-bodied ectotherms.



Laumann, Katie May (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey; Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute
of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Phylogenetic systematics of sturgeons (Acipenseridae) based on mitochondrial DNA data

The systematics of sturgeons (Acipenseridae) have been studied through morphological and molecular
methods, although a well-resolved, broadly accepted phylogeny remains elusive. The 25 extant species
in the family are classified in four genera:            Acipenser, Huso, Scaphirhynchus,        and
Pseudoscaphirhynchus . The two species of the genus Huso have been considered to be the sister-