e
for amphibians in all areas of the country, and in all political climates, not just those favoring
environmental interests. However, game and fish policies favoring amphibians have not generally been
formalized; such practices currently depend on the interests, values, and ethics of individual land
managers. In lieu of yet more legislation, establishing a new ethic that recognizes amphibians as critical
components of most American ecosystems would go far towards conserving amphibians. Here I use an
example from our recent work on Crawfish Frogs ( Lithobates areolatus ) to show how engaging land
managers can promote amphibian conservation outside of formal institutional policies and practices in a
region of the country not known for its progressive politics.



Lardner, Bjorn (Colorado State University); Savidge, Julie (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
United States); Reed, Robert; Rodda, Gordon (U.S. Geological Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States)

A telemetry-based method for measuring animal activity

Radio transmitters for animal telemetry can be built to incorporate a mercury switch that causes the signal
to change from a fast pulse rate to a slow pulse rate depending on how the transmitter is oriented. But the
lack of signal change is not evidence that the animal did not move, because not all movements cause the
switch to tip. We tried to increase the reliability of information on activity in juvenile Brown Treesnakes
(Boiga irregularis) by analyzing, with the sound analysis program Avisoft SAS Lab Pro, not just pulse rate
but also the signal amplitude received and recorded (with a <$100 digital recorder) at a fixed station. We
exploited the fact that the transmitter‘s antenna orientation relative to the receiving antenna affects the
strength of the signal received. Also the structure and density of vegetation between the transmittered
animal and the receiver will cause variation in received signal amplitude when an animal travels through a
heterogeneous habitat. There are commercially available data loggers that automate collection of this
type of data, but they can be quite expensive – especially if more than one logger is required (as when
multiple animals located far from each other are simultaneously tracked). Our solution is comparably
cheap, but more labor intensive. However, we believe our method can extract more data, or data of better
quality, than can commercial logging stations, because we have the ability to tailor the signal detection
settings afterwards. Doing so, we can optimize the delicate tradeoff between failing to detect transmitter
signals (signal discrimination threshold set too high) versus registering excessive background radio
frequency noise (threshold set too low). We describe field recording obstacles that we experienced;
provide pros and cons of different software analysis workflows; show how pulse rate data compare to
amplitude data; and visualize how weather station data can be aligned with activity diagrams. We note
that those who work on very small animals, requiring the most lightweight possible transmitters (e.g. 0.35




                                                                                                        406
g), might be able to use amplitude data alone to avoid the additional weight (0.4 – 0.5 g) inflicted by
inclusion of a position-sensitive switch with the transmitter.



Lardner, Bjorn (Colorado State University); Rodda, Gordon; Yackel Adams, Amy (U.S. Geological
Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States); Savidge, Julie (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
United States); Reed, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States)

Detection rates of geckos in visual encounter surveys: Turning confounding variables into useful
knowledge

Visual encounter surveys without capture-mark-recapture are prone to generate population size indices
suffering from an unknown bias because survey conditions differ in time and space. Knowledge of
variables that cause such variation, and the size of their effects, can be used to guide the collection of
relevant survey covariates, correct survey data, or anticipate situations where bias might be unacceptably
large. Adjusting for these ‗nuisance‘ variables can simultaneously help shed light on the ecology of the
target species. We used negative binomial regression to evaluate confounding variables for a data set
where 220-meter long transects were surveyed at night, on 9,475 occasions, for invasive Brown
Treesnakes (Boiga irregularis) and – as a by-product – their gecko prey (primarily Hemidactylus frenatus
and Lepidodactylus lugubris). Searchers differed substantially in gecko detection rates with the most
extreme pairwise comparisons differing by a factor of six. Detection rates with the worst and the best
headlamp differed by a factor of at least two. More geckos were seen during wet weather conditions, but
the effect size was small. Strong winds had a negative effect on sightings, and the wind effect is
potentially as large as those of searchers or headlamps. The moon phase caused 14% more gecko
sightings when contrasting a detection-rate peak (waning and new moon) to a detection-rate dip (a few
nights prior to full moon). The latter result was obtained when simultaneously adjusting for whether or not
the moon was above the horizon at the time of the focal transect survey, which had an additive effect
corresponding to 11%. Fitting a sine function to data suggested that the gecko population size was 24%
higher at the end of the wet season than at the end of the dry season. There was also strong support for
more long-term population fluctuations. The various factors influencing gecko counts are likely to play a
role in nocturnal surveys of many cryptic species. While some factors can be addressed well with
measured covariates, others will be difficult to eliminate as a significant source of error in long-term
monitoring programs.



Larson, Derek (University of Toronto); Evans, David (Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, Canada)

Tooth variation in Varanus komodoensis

Establishing the range of intraspecific variation of taxonomically informative characters is essential when
recognizing species based on morphological characters. In fossil datasets, this information is often
lacking due to restricted sample sizes of individuals of a known species, with many fossil vertebrates
known only from a single individual. Varanus komodoensis , as the largest extant lizard and the largest
living animal with xiphodont (latterally compressed, serrated) teeth, has often been used in
palaeobiological studies as a model for theropod dinosaurs in terms of feeding behaviour and tooth and
jaw biomechanics. Here we use V. komodoensis to illustrate the range in variation in the teeth of an
extant xiphodont faunivore. Fifteen skulls of reproductively adult Varanus komodoensis were measured
to evaluate the degree of morphological variation present in the species. Nineteen linear skull
measurements were taken, and three gross tooth measurements as well as mesial and distal tooth



                                                                                                       407
denticle size were measured for each of ten teeth across the tooth rows. Tooth counts vary little among
specimens, the smallest specimens having one fewer dentary tooth positions than the largest skulls, but
maxillary and premaxillary tooth counts remaining identical. Denticle size and tooth width in regionally
equivalent teeth also remain essentially constant across the size ranges even though tooth length and
height increase approximately proportionally to skull size. These findings suggest that some aspects of
tooth morphology are remarkably consistent between individuals and robust to differences in body size.
Comparison of multiple individuals indicates the potential of diagnostic characters in teeth. The presence
of consistent measurements at the same tooth position in individuals differing in size also suggests the
possibility of identifying tooth position consistently based on tooth morphology. These results have
implications for the study of theropod dinosaurs, as most of our knowledge of the abundance and
diversity of these animals comes from the description of isolated teeth. These results are important for
understanding the role this variation plays in the functional morphology.



Larson, Shawn (Seattle Aquarium); Griffing, Denise; Hollander, Joel; Christiansen, Jeff (Seattle
Aquarium, Canada)

Summary of sixgill shark tagging and abundance estimates from 2003-2009 in the urban inland
waters of Elliott Bay, Seattle

Anecdotal reports of diver-shark encounters in the Pacific Northwest stimulated interest in the normally
deep-dwelling, poorly studied bluntnose sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) and the reason for its
presence in the shallow waters of the Salish Sea. Capture/Mark/ Recapture techniques were used to
identify individual sharks for population structure and movement pattern analysis. Temporal changes in
relative abundance in Puget Sound are reported from a controlled study site (2003-2005) at the Seattle
Aquarium and citizen sighting/encounter reports (2000-2009). At the Seattle Aquarium study site on Elliott
Bay, Seattle, 45 sixgills were tagged with modified Floy visual marker tags, along with an estimated 116
additional untagged sixgills observed via video camera.          The majority of sixgills observed were
adolescents, and they were found to be significantly more abundant in the summer months. Observations
of sixgills peaked in 2003-2005 and declined to very few observations from 2006-2009. While
conservation measures have been enacted in Washington and British Columbia waters, additional
measures may be necessary as large, long-lived sharks like sixgills are thought to be unable to sustain
exploitation.



Lattanzio, Matthew (Ohio University); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

Functional consequences of disturbance for tree lizards: Integrating isotopic evidence from
multiple trophic levels

Changes in resource diversity and number, mediated by trophic interactions, ultimately shape species
responses to disturbance. At the heart of the species response to these changes is the individual stress
response to the disturbance itself: to disperse, adapt, or go extinct. For many individuals, the most viable
option is to adapt, which usually requires some level of plasticity in trophic (functional) relationships. In
arid grassland habitats of the southwestern US, prescribed fire is a common practice intended to mimic
historical episodes of wildfire and maintain ecosystem structure and function. However, the changes to
the environment incurred by this disturbance mimic those predicted by recent models of climate change:
an increase and spread of grass cover and non-native grass species. The functional consequences of
this structural reorganization of dominant vegetation types remain unknown. Here we model changes in



                                                                                                         408
habitat and trophic linkages during a three-year period in southeastern Arizona. We monitor three study
sites: an unburned control, and two treatment sites varying in burn frequency. As predicted, these sites
differ significantly in resource distributions, with grass cover positively associated with burn frequency
(Analysis of Similarities, Global R=0.45, P<0.05). We focus on ornate tree lizards (Urosaurus ornatus), a
meso-predator, and model trophic linkages at each site using stable isotope analysis. Our analyses
involve mixing models of carbon and nitrogen isotopes based on tissues from multiple trophic levels (i.e.,
primary producers, arthropod consumers, and lizards). We provide a synergistic model of the functional
consequences of disturbance for lizard species that can inform future studies and conservation efforts
alike.



Lattanzio, Matthew (Ohio University); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Canada)

Habitat use, phenotypic variation, and grazing: The responses of tree lizard populations to altered
landscapes

A major question in ecology is how the stress-responses of organisms to habitat disturbance affect
population dynamics. Because disturbance alters the distribution of resources (e.g., structural and
dietary), organisms that use those resources likely have to adjust their habitat preferences in disturbed
regions to satisfy energetic and social (e.g., territorial) demands. Moreover, offspring reared in disturbed
environments may differ in a variety of phenotypic traits, including morphology and performance
capabilities, from those in undisturbed environments.         Ranchland grazing is a common land
management practice in the arid southwestern US, yet its acute and chronic effects on wildlife remain
largely unknown. The mosaic of disturbed and unaltered patches created by grazing thus provides an
opportunity to link the stress response of reptiles with population persistence in a fragmented landscape.
Here we expand on a project begun during 2009 evaluating the phenotypic responses of tree lizard (
Urosaurus ornatus ) populations to land management practices in Arizona by presenting data from grazed
and unaltered sites in the Malpai borderlands area of Cochise County, Arizona. Results from six sites will
be presented: four grazed and two unaltered sites. Preliminary analyses highlight strong structural
variation among grazed and unaltered sites (ANOSIM, Global R = 0.276, P&lt;0.001), which is expected
to translate into variation in habitat use by tree lizards. We will analyze lizard habitat use with spatially-
explicit models to account for variation in the available environmental matrix at each site. Because these
lizards are polymorphic (associated with primary throat coloration), we will compare intra-specific
dynamics in habitat use as well. We will frame our habitat use results in the context of disturbance but
also with reference to morphological (in both size and color expression) and performance (endurance)
variation across sites. In this manner, we will be able to delineate how changes in the landscape as a
result of disturbance influence phenotypic integration by small-bodied ectotherms.



Laumann, Katie May (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey; Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute
of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Phylogenetic systematics of sturgeons (Acipenseridae) based on mitochondrial DNA data

The systematics of sturgeons (Acipenseridae) have been studied through morphological and molecular
methods, although a well-resolved, broadly accepted phylogeny remains elusive. The 25 extant species
in the family are classified in four genera:            Acipenser, Huso, Scaphirhynchus,        and
Pseudoscaphirhynchus . The two species of the genus Huso have been considered to be the sister-
group to all other sturgeon species based on morphological data; the remaining species form the



                                                                                                          409
subfamily Acipenserinae, which contains the genus               Acipenser    (17 species) and the tribe
Scaphirhynchini (including 3 species of the genus Scaphirhynchus and the 3 species in genus
Pseudoscaphirhynchus ).        Recent studies using both morphological and molecular data have
reconsidered this hypothesis, although the details of relationships vary from study to study. For example,
the position of Huso varies drastically as do the details of the break-up of tribe Scaphirhynchini (e.g.,
Scaphirhynchus has been found to be either the sister-group of all other sturgeons or sister to multiple
groupings of other sturgeon species, only some of which include                    Pseudoscaphirhynchus.
Pseuoscaphirhynchus has been found to be most closely related to A. stellatus .) Recent molecular-
based phylogenetic hypotheses have utilized relatively short segments of different loci, which may
contribute to the lack of agreement among these studies. Adding uncertainty to the reliability of some of
these studies is the use of molecular data from unvouchered specimens. In this presentation, we will offer
a new phylogenetic hypothesis for the family Acipenseridae based on more complete sequences of three
mitochondrial loci (cytochrome b , 16S, and 12S), a partial sequence for cytochrome oxidase I , and
development of additional phylogenetically informative loci. Preliminary pairwise distance analyses of loci
from full mitochondrial sequences (available for H. huso, S. albus, and six species of Acipenser ) have
shown significant variation in NADH-1 and NADH-6, indicating that these loci may be phylogenetically
informative. For this reason, these loci will be included in our analyses. The primary focus of this study is
to clarify the placement of Huso relative to species within Acipenser . Additionally, we will more
thoroughly investigate relationships among Acipenser, Scaphirhynchus, and Pseudoscaphirhynchus.



Lavin, Brian (Sonoma State University); Feldman, Chris (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada); Wogan,
Guinevere; McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley, Canada)

Biogeography in a wide-ranging forest lizard: Elgaria coerulea

Elgaria coerulea is a lizard that lives in cool moist forests and ranges around the Great Central Valley of
California into the Pacific Northwest as far north as British Columbia and into the interior mesic forests of
Idaho and Montana. The species is divided up into four subspecies, E. c. coerulea that lives in the coast
range in the vicinity of San Francisco Bay, E. c. palmeri that lives in the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range,
E. c. shastensis that lives in Northern California, and E. c. princeps that lives in the Pacific Northwest.
Previous morphometric analysis found evidence for a coastal and interior pattern class.

We examined mtDNA (ND2 and ND4) in E. coerulea throughout it's range in order to determine
biogeographical patterns. While low support was found for the relationships between most of the deeper
genetic breaks, within major lineages small scale phylogeographical patterns were present and
supported. Major lineages as well as sublineages were confined to geographical areas some of which are
major biogeographical breaks found in other species. Based on the mtDNA the biogeographical patterns
may not be supported with the current taxonomy although lineages were found that resemble E. c.
princeps and E. c. coerulea. They were also related to E. c. shastensis in the Interior Coast Range
while major lineages of E. c. shastenis and E c. palmeri were grouped together with very low support.




                                                                                                         410
Lawing, A. Michelle (Indiana University); Flecks, Morris; Ahmadzadeh, Faraham; Dambach, Johannes
(Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Engler, Jan O. (Zoologisches
Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig and Trier University, Canada); Habel, Jan-Christian; Hartmann,
Timo (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Hörnes, David (AG Zoologischer
Garten Köln, Canada); Ihlow, Flora; Schidelko, Kathrin; Stiels, Darius (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum
Alexander Koenig, Canada); Polly, P. David (Indiana University, Canada); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches
Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada)

Extinct during the past, yet still alive? Evaluating the impact of glacial cycles on species richness,
distribution, and phylogeographic patterns in Nearctic Chelonians

Global climate is changing and species must respond by tracking suitable habitat, adapting to the
changing conditions, or becoming extinct. To understand how species will respond to future climate
change, we have investigated their historic patterns of response to fluctuating climates. Glacial climate
cycles over the last two million years have repeatedly restructured the environment and changed
availability of suitable habitat. We used species distribution modelling to assess the temporal niche
dynamics in Nearctic Chelonians (n=59 of 61 species) over the last 320 ky. We choose these turtles and
tortoises because their current distributions are well documented, they have a good fossil record, they
have well resolved phylogenetic relationships, and many of their phylogeographies are modelled with
molecular data. We combine these independent lines of evidence to test two hypotheses: (1) Species
currently occupying only small ranges are more likely to be found in non-analogous climates when their
current realized niches are projected onto past climates than species occupying large ranges. (2) Our
palaeophylogeographic modelling of historical range changes are consistent with the chelonian fossil
record and molecular phylogeographic hypotheses. (1) We found that species currently occupying small
ranges are frequently forced into non-analogous climates when their potential distributions are projected
onto past climates. Comparisons of the most similar available climates with those currently occupied offer
new insights in the species‘ niche dynamics beyond their currently realized niches. However, some
species with small ranges that occur in highly stable climates (e.g., Kinosternon durangoense) are
predicted to have had minimal range expansions or contractions and were not forced into non-analogous
climates by the palaeophylogeographic models. (2) We found that our palaeophylogeographic modelling
of ranges through the past 320 ky are largely consistent with the fossil record and that our models are in
concordance with published molecular phylogeographic studies. Specifically, we are able to show that
strong bottleneck effects are evident in those species with the most extensive range contractions. In
addition, several species‘ ranges dwindle to nothing in our models during glacial maxima, highlighting
species specific niche dynamics or scale effects not covered by our framework. These issues are
discussed and compared in detail with available genetic studies.



Leache, Adam (University of Washington);

Biogeography of African Agama lizards

African lizards in the genus Agama are a diverse and widespread component of squamate diversity in
Africa. Their extensive distribution across Africa makes them an ideal group for investigating continent-
wide biogeography. Agama lizards are also exceptionally diverse morphologically and behaviorally and
have evolved a variety of social structures, habitat preferences, body sizes, and sexual dimorphic
colorations. In collaboration with 15 researchers from across Europe, Africa, and the United States, I
present a comprehensive phylogeny for African Agama lizards that captures nearly all species diversity
and paves the way for new insights into continent-wide analyses of diversification and biogeography.
Estimating phylogenetic relationships using a combination of two mitochondrial genes and four nuclear



                                                                                                      411
genes provides strong support for unique evolutionary radiations within each region of Africa. The
phylogeny also supports the parallel evolution of body sizes, habitat preferences, and social structures,
and transitions in this suite of characters are correlated. The weak support for critical nodes at the base of
the phylogeny result in estimates of the historical connections between areas and ancestral character
states with wide confidence intervals. Reducing this error by estimating a phylogeny with increased
support is being accomplished with new DNA sequence capture techniques that target 500 homologous
nuclear loci simultaneously.



Leal, Manuel (Duke University); Leal, Manuel (Duke University, Durham, NC, United States)

Behavioral flexibility and problem-solving in lizards

The role of behavioralflexibility in responding to new or changing environmental challenges is a central
theme in cognitive ecology. Studies of behavioral flexibility have focused mostly on mammals and birds
because theory predicts that behavioral flexibility is favored in species or clades that exploit a diversity of
habitats or food sources and/or have complex social structure, attributes not associated with ectothermic
vertebrates. Here, we present the results of a series of experiments designed to test cognitive abilities
across multiple cognitive modules in three species of Anolis lizards. Anoles exhibited behavioral flexibility
across multiple cognitive tasks, including solving a novel motor task using multiple strategies and reversal
learning, as well as rapid associative learning. However, the species differ in the degree of behavioral
flexibility. The observed levels of flexibility were unexpected because lizards are commonly believed to
have limited cognitive abilities and highly stereotyped behavior. Also, interspecific differences in flexibility
might be related to differences in the ecology of each species, although it is also possible that other
factors such as differences in species "personality" can contribute to our results. More generally, our
findings strongly suggest a re-thinking of our understanding of the cognitive abilities of lizards and of the
factors favoring the evolution of behavioral flexibility.



Leary, Arianne (University of North Florida Biology Department);

Evaluating the effects of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on coastal and pelagic species in the
Gulf of Mexico via polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon metabolite detection in bile with fixed
wavelength fluorescence

The Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill (DHOS) released large quantities of petroleum into the Gulf of Mexico. It
is vital to determine the effects on the Gulf wildlife from the oil-related pollutants, particularly the polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are the most toxic components of oil. The goal of this study is to
evaluate the effects of the oil spill on pelagic and coastal species in the Gulf of Mexico. This study
examined PAH-metabolites, fluorescent aromatic compounds (FACs), in fish bile by means of fixed
wavelength fluorescence. Fluorescent values were measured for naphthalene, pyrene and
benzo(a)pyrene; concentrations were also determined for each FAC with biliary protein concentrations
used       to normalize.     Additionally, the ratio between petrogenic (naphthalene) and pyrogenic
(benzo(a)pyrene) FACs was assessed to analyze source of PAHs. The results show evidence for
naphthalene-, pyrene- and benzo(a)pyrene- like metabolites present in bile for all locations, suggesting
animals are accumulating PAHs and metabolizing them into FACs. The results also indicate differences
between species suggesting that species may metabolize the PAHs in different manners. Teleost showed
higher concentrations for naphthalene-like metabolites than elasmobranchs suggesting that teleost
accumulate more PAHs than elasmobranchs. Sites impacted by oil show higher naphthalene values than



                                                                                                               412
references sites, indicating the animals in these sites are accumulating PAHs that are likely due to a
petrogenic source, such as oil from the DHOS. In particular, sandbars sharks showed higher values for
naphthalene-like metabolites at oil impacted sites compared to the reference sites, but not for
benzo(a)pyrene.



Leavitt, Daniel (Texas A&M University); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, Canada)

Should we make generalizations about specialists? Disassembly of a lizard community in a
fragmented sand dune ecosystem

Fragmentation disrupts the structure of populations, communities, and species‘ distributions. We will
discuss a comparative field-based study examining consequences of fragmentation on lizard community
structure in a sand-dune landscape in southeastern New Mexico. We evaluated patterns of community
structure using data from nearly 12,000 captures of 8 species of lizards over a 3-year period to analyze
patterns of relative abundance, species occurrence, and idealized models of community organization.
We ask if specialists are more susceptible to fragmentation effects than generalists. Non-fragmented
sites were more diverse than fragmented sites (Hurlbert‘s ∆1: 0.40 ± 0.09; 0.22 ± 0.05; respectively, W =
8, p < 0.001). Two of the eight species present, Holbrookia maculata and Sceloporus arenicolus, were
significantly less abundant in fragmented sites than in non-fragmented sites (W = 33, p= 0.01; W = 7, p <
0.001, respectively). Structure of non-fragmented communities was suggestive of the ―nested subsets‖
model but the fragmented communities did not demonstrate any clear pattern of structure. Not all species
responded equally to fragmentation. Both H. maculata and S. arenicolus, demonstrate narrow habitat
preferences and were also the most affected by fragmentation. Holbrookia maculata select for flat,
western facing habitat with shinnery oak cover. Sceloporus arenicolus select for steep slopes in blowout
habitats. Phrynosoma cornutum is a dietary specialist but did not demonstrate a distinct response to
fragmentation though they were in higher numbers in the fragmented sites. Regardless if a species is a
specialist or generalist, the specific mechanisms responsible for reduced species abundance or presence
should be evaluated on a species-to-species basis.



Leavitt, Daniel (Texas A&M University); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, Canada)

Singing in the rain?: an evaluation of the endemic ecological specialist, Sceloporus arenicolus as
an umbrella species for biodiversity conservation.

The umbrella species approach to biodiversity conservation suggests that protected status for one
species will benefit other co-occurring species. In December 2010, the dunes sagebrush lizard (
Sceloporus arenicolus ) was proposed for listing as Endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service. Protection for this species was predicted to result in ―umbrella‖ protection for many other
endemic or priority species found within the Mescalero-Monahans Shinnery Sands ecosystem. At least 15
species of beetles, cockroaches, and crickets along with S. arenicolus are endemic to this ecosystem.
Some of these species are psammophilic, and use shinnery oak dunes, which is required habitat for S.
arenicolus . However, not all the endemics are dependent on shinnery oak dunes. We evaluated
endemicity and species richness patterns for ants, beetles, lizards, and small mammals at 27 locations
where dunes sagebrush lizards are present and not present. Analysis of patterns in species richness in
this ecosystem indicate that multiple habitats in addition to the habitat for S. arenicolus would be
required to prevent localized species loss and community disassembly.      We also used null models to




                                                                                                      413
compare patterns of species co-occurrence and were able to identify the scale at which presence of S.
arenicolus corresponds with high endemicity and richness.



Leeb, Christoph (University of Vienna Department of Evolutionary Biology); Ringler, Max; Ringler, Eva;
Gollmann, Günter (University of Vienna Department of Evolutionary Biology, Canada)

A camera trap study of mass-hibernation in Salamandra salamandra in the Vienna Woods, Austria

Although the fire salamander Salamandra salamandra is a character species of the Vienna Woods in
Austria, studies on the population ecology of this primarily nocturnal species are lacking for this region so
far. We investigated a population of S. salamandra in the Maurerwald, a managed forest at the city
boundary of Vienna, where S. salamandra uses small ponds and puddles as breeding sites, thereby
contrasting the common stream-breeding habits of fire salamanders. Population size was estimated via a
capture-mark-recapture study from 2010-2011. A total of 1460 capture events, representing 935 different
individuals, indicate a population size between 1900 and 2600 individuals at a density of at least 38/ha.
Location data of recaptured individuals, obtained by GPS, allowed us to identify a 0,5ha trench-system in
a rich structured part of the forest as the main winter-hibernation site. Field observations and the analysis
of movement patters suggested a prominent role of one single burrow in this trench system as a retreat
site. This was confirmed by a self-constructed light-barrier camera which we placed at the entrance of the
burrow. Off more than 25.000 photos that were taken during five month since mid-October 2011, over
5.000 showed fire salamanders, representing a total of over 160 different individuals. This indicates a
mass-hibernation of at least 6% of the estimated population size inside this single burrow, a phenomenon
which has been anecdotally mentioned in the literature, but was not investigated in detail so far. The
pictures also show that at least four out of six other amphibian species that occur in this region hibernate
in this burrow syntopically ( Ichthyosaura alpestris, Bombina variegata, Bufo bufo, Rana dalmatina ).
Furthermore Natrix natrix , a potential predator of S. salamandra , and Apodemus sylvaticus (Wood
mouse) were captured on the pictures. Our study points out the importance of rich structured habitats for
amphibians and demonstrates the significance of detailed knowledge on specific characteristics of certain
populations for effective conservation management. On the other hand our study shows the possibilities
of camera traps for individual-based studies in herpetology, a method that is underrepresented compared
to similar studies on other vertebrates.



Lee-Yaw, Julie (University of British Columbia); Jacobs, Chris (Leiden University, Canada); Irwin, Darren
(University of British Columbia, Canada)

Evidence for reduced feeding performance in a contact zone between long-toed salamander
subspecies

Studying the outcome of secondary contact between lineages that were separated in distinct Pleistocene
refugia provides insight into the fate of biological diversity in northern areas. In cases where reproductive
isolation between lineages is weak, secondary contact may result in extensive hybridization and the
eventual collapse of genetic differences between lineages. In contrast, lineages that evolved substantial
ecological or genetic differences in isolation may maintain their distinctiveness if individuals do not
recognize members of the other lineage as mates or if hybridization leads to the production of offspring
that are less fit than non-hybrid offspring. The post-glacial range of the long-toed salamander (
Ambystoma macrodactulyum ) is comprised of three distinct lineages or subspecies. Here we present
genetic evidence to support hybridization between two of these lineages where they come into secondary



                                                                                                         414
contact. To better understand the fate of these lineages, we explore the fitness of hybrid and non-hybrid
adult individuals. Specifically, we test feeding performance and subsequent mass acquisition during the
summer feeding period, a critical time for individuals to gain sufficient resources for winter hibernation and
gamete production. Results from our common garden experiment point to both reduced feeding
performance and mass acquisition in hybrid individuals. The potential implications of these results for
both the maintenance of genetic differentiation across the range of the long-toed salamander and the
taxonomic status of subspecies will be discussed.



Lefebvre, Jose (Acadia University); Mockford, Steve (Acadia University, Canada)

Male effective population and level of multiple paternity in Blanding's turtles (Emidoidea
blandingii) in Nova Scotia

Freshwater turtle mating systems have several interesting components including multiple paternity within
a clutch of eggs, and the ability of females to store sperm. Studies of turtle mating systems have focused
on the role of these female characteristics in establishing and maintaining genetic diversity within a
species, and the effect that variations in these traits have on the maintenance of viable populations.
Previous research, done at Acadia University, suggests that characteristics of male mating dynamics may
also have significant impacts on population viability. Work done on the Nova Scotia population of
Blanding's turtle ( Emydoidea blandingi) suggests that male mating success may be much lower than
previously thought, and that the effective number of breeding males may be as low as 5% of the male
census population. If true, the genetically effective size of the population (N e ) may be much lower than
the census size of the population; this would influence assessments of the species risk of extinction, and
management plans to mitigate those risks. This involved collecting genetic samples from clutches of
hatchling turtles, from the known mothers of these clutches, and from as many males as possible. These
samples were genotyped at 10-11 microsatellite loci to establish individual DNA profiles. A model will be
developed based on the rejection algorithm of Ramakrishnan et al . (2004) to estimate male mating
success based on the relationship between maternal and offspring genotypes. Two data sets exist from
other populations (Osentoski, 2001; Refsnyder, 2009) to which this model could be applied which would
provide some measure of whether the Nebm/N m ratio varies within the species.



LeGros, David (Laurentian University); Steinberg, Brad (Algonquin Provincial Park, Canada);
Lesbarrères, David (Laurentian University, Canada)

Forest roads and mitigation techniques for salamanders in Algonquin Provincial Park.

Habitat fragmentation is a serious threat to wildlife in many regions. In some regions of Canada, there are
extensive networks of roads that can fragment habitat, even in remote areas. For salamanders, which
have specific environmental requirements, roads can prevent migrations and dispersal as they represent
a physical barrier due to elevated temperatures, reduced humidity and lack of suitable hiding places. To
help mitigate the negative impacts of roads in Algonquin Provincial Park, Canada, we tested several
types of woody debris (wood chips, conifer boughs and timbers) applied to the surface of un-used forestry
roads. We hypothesize that these treatments will encourage amphibians to cross roads in specific places
by creating refuges. We used pitfall traps and to test the effectiveness of treatments. The addition of
woody debris did not show clear benefits for salamanders when sampled with pitfall traps. However,
additional analysis of the timber treatment provided insight into refuge selection by salamanders.
Salamanders chose timbers that were significantly larger than average pieces, most likely because these



                                                                                                          415
large timbers retain higher humidity and cooler temperature than small timbers. Aggregations of
salamanders also occurred under timbers, demonstrating the benefit of suitable cover when crossing
roads. Overall, our study demonstrates that applying large woody debris can create suitable short term
habitat for salamanders on an un-used logging road.



Lehr, Edgar (Illinois Wesleyan Univerity); Moravec, Jiri (National Museum, Department of Zoology, Praha
1, Czech Republic); Cusi Martinez, Juan Carlos (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima,
PERU, Canada)

Herpetofaunal Inventory of the Yanachaga-Chemillén National Park in Peru

Established in 1986 the Yanachaga-Chemillén National Park (YCNP in the following) covers 1220 km²
between 460 and 3643 m elevation and is located at 10º33"37' – 17'37"S and 75º30'21" – 20'39"W in
eastern central Peru. Environmental gradients within the YCNP span the ecoregions of puna (3000 –
3643 m), montane forests (600 – 3000 m), often separated by Inter Andean valleys, and humid tropical
forests (below 600 m). Exploration of the herpetofauna has mostly been neglected. The Instituto Nacional
de Recursos Naturales reported 16 species of reptiles and 2 species of frogs from the YCNP in 1995, but
did not list these species. The few herpetological surveys that were conducted inside the YCNP in the
1980s by Hedges, early 1990s by Icochea, in 2008 by Chaparro and by Boano and colleagues, and in
2010 by Venegas and colleagues had a focus on amphibians, were short and lasted between a few days
to a few weeks. In summary, 12 new species of amphibians and one species of lizard from the YCNP
have been described since 1990.         Excursions to the YCNP will be conducted in the rainy season
between January and March 2012. The objectives are to record amphibian and reptile species along
altitudinal gradients in different ecoregions and habitats through transects and quadrat plots, to collect
data about ecology and behavior of species such as habitat preference, reproductive mode or acoustic
communication, and to describe species new to science including unknown amphibian larvae. This
presentation is aimed to summarize all available and new herpetofaunal data obtained in the YCNP.



Leite, Cleo (UNIFESP); Taylor, Edwin (University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom); Wang,
Tobias (Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark); Abe, Augusto; Denis, Andrade (UNESP, Rio Claro, São
Paulo, Brazil)

Cardiac shunts and physiological function: new experimental models x same old question

Along the last decades several evidences contribute to the assumption that the magnitude and/or the
direction of the reptile cardiac shunt, L-R shunt (systemic bypass) or R-L shunt (lung bypass) is
influenced by the physiological state of the animal and also that it is regulated. The cardiac shunt is
hypothesized to be of adaptive significance in a number of ecological and physiological situations.
Despite that, direct experimental confirmation of any fitness improvement is nonexistent until today. A
recent study on rattlesnakes, C. durissus , reported bilateral differentiation on the cardiovascular role of L
and R vagus branches. C. durissus has bilateral vagal innervation of the heart, while the resistance of
the pulmonary artery to its single lung is controlled solely by the L vagus. So the left unilateral vagotomy
(LUV) is an efficient method to prevent the cardiac shunt control in C. durissus . Recent results
evidenced that LUV was validated for long-term experiments since the absence of blood flow control
remains over time and the unilateral vagotomy by itself did not cause any harm effect. The LUV leads to
an immediate and permanent increasing in the Qpul and it has been suggested that it could change the
overall dynamic of oxygen usage due the alteration on the systemic PO 2 and O 2 cascade and so the




                                                                                                          416
RMR in different temperatures and hence, if persistent, could chronically affect some measurable
physiological parameters such as min and max VO 2 in different temperatures, long run appetite and
growth rate. Despite the hemodynamic alterations were corroborated by our experiments the supposed
consequences of it were not present. The cardiac shunt did not provide any fundamental advantage, or
play any important role: (1) for the maintenance of RMR in 15, 20 and 30C; (2) for the energy mobilization
during spontaneous or impelled activity in 20 and 30C; (3) In any factor that contributes for the energy
mobilized during digestion; (4) In any important factor for the mass conversion and growth; (5) for the
energy usage during long term food deprivation; (6) for the energetic mobilization during spontaneous or
forced activity. Until recently, the current hypotheses on the adaptive function of the cardiac shunt were
mostly deduced based on correlations between the net cardiac shunt and the physiological state of the
reptiles. Such hypotheses were not confirmed here. An alternative explanation is that the cardiac shunt
could have adaptive significance during the embryonic stage and due the low metabolic requests of the
reptile species and could simply persist in adult stages because they have not been selected against.
Such alternative explanation changes the adaptive concept for this character, which has been driving
both the experimental design for functional studies, and the view of the obtained results.



Lemckert, Francis (Niche Environment and Heritage);

Strong Breeding Site Fidelity in male Perons Tree Frog (Litoria peronii)

Perons Tree Frog is a wide ranging hylid breeding in ponds, pools and streams found in various habitats
located throughout southeastern Australia. Two old ponds and four newly constructed ponds were
searched for frogs regularly between 2004 and 2010, with individuals being collected and marked with
PIT tags to determine when and where frogs appeared. I marked 198 males at the two old ponds, which
are separated by less than 10m, but none of the 52 recaptured males (recaptured 1-9 times) were
recorded swapping ponds. The four new ponds were constructed in 2000 and are separated by distances
of less than 300m. They were colonised by adult perons tree frogs as soon as they filled and I marked
280 male frogs at the ponds with 62 being recaptured 1-3. Two frogs have been recorded using a second
pond. It appears that male frogs retain very strong fidelity to a selected breeding site. However, given that
adult frogs selected the new ponds, it is not based on returning to the natal site. This may be a case of
strong fidelity to the first chosen breeding site, with frogs opportunistically selecting an available site that
they essentially remain faithful to for the rest of their lives.



Lenders, Rob (Radboud University Nijmegen); Janssen, Ingo (RAVON & UvA/IBED, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands)

The grass snake and the basilisk, from pre-Christian protective house god to the Antichrist

The grass snake and the basilisk, from pre-Christian protective house god to the Antichrist H.J.R.
Lenders, Radboud University Nijmegen, Institute for Water and Wetland Research, Department of
Environmental Science, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.    I.A.W.     Janssen,    RAVON       foundation,
Nijmegen/Amsterdam, The Netherlands &amp; University of Amsterdam, Institute for Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Dynamics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The grass snake, Natrix natrix , is the only oviparous reptile species able of maintaining sustainable
populations in the far north of Europe (up to 67° north latitude). The species owes its far northern
distribution to agriculture, or, to be more specific, to stock breeding which resulted in the production and



                                                                                                            417
potting up of dung. Dung heaps appear to be perfect breeding sites for grass snakes and even surpass
‗natural‘ reproduction sites in quality: forcing manure is an energy source for grass snake egg
development that exceeds the capacity of more natural sources such as rotting wood. We examined
whether there are also historical indications for the importance of dung and dung heaps as crucial
elements in the grass snake‘s life cycle throughout Europe. Moreover, we raised the question whether
this hypothesized dependence of the grass snake on human culture, may have had a reciprocal effect. In
other words: did the apparent bond of grass snakes to agriculture also have a cultural effect? For this, we
conducted an historical research making use of historical sources covering a wide variety of disciplinary
fields such as natural history, archaeology, and the history of folklore, alchemy and religion. From these
sources it became apparent that agriculture has had a clearly positive influence on grass snakes since
the Neolithic. This positive influence of humans on the species did not only result from physical
opportunities offered by humans in the form of dung heaps that were beneficial for reproduction and
hibernation, but also from the fact that grass snakes were considered to be chtonic deities that were not
to be harmed. The conversion of Europe to Christianity, however, marked the turning of the cultural tide
for the species. From being a god originally, the grass snake turned into the number one symbol of the
Anti-Christ: the basilisk. Pre-Christian as well as Christian superstition regarding grass snakes survived
well into the 20 th century and is possibly still present in some remote parts of Europe. However, with the
increasing loss of influence of the Christian believe and superstition in large parts of Europe also the
witch hunt for the grass snake has largely come to an end by now. Measures in the form of creating
artificial reproduction opportunities by means of compost and manure heaps rehabilitate the grass snake
and reinstate this species‘ place in our natural and cultural environment.



Lennon, Corissa (Eastern Illinois University); Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL,
United States)

Trophic niche breadth in a widely-foraging snake (Colubridae: <i>Coluber</i>)

The trophic niche width of a species varies depending on the foraging strategy employed by the
individuals within a population. Among reptiles, the niche breadth of many species of snakes is relatively
understudied.      Within this clade, the genus Coluber includes wide-ranging, actively foraging snakes
that have been historically labeled as dietary generalists. We report on the diet composition of Coluber
constrictor foxii , the Blue Racer.       The dietary information available for this subspecies is mostly
anecdotal and little is known about ontogenetic or gender differences in the prey species consumed. In
addition to obtaining gut contents by palpation, we employed stable isotope analyses using δ 13 C and δ
15 N to quantitatively describe the dietary preferences of C. constrictor foxii . We collected blood and
tissue samples of C. constrictor foxii , along with whole specimens representing a range of potential prey
taxa.     We freeze-dried all samples, homogenized them using an amalgamator, and analyzed the
samples using mass spectroscopy. We compared the isotope signatures of potential prey taxa to those
from C. constrictor foxii tissues to determine the prey items that the snakes are including in their diet.
We used a Bayesian mixing model to determine the source of δ 13 C and δ 15 N in the snake tissues,
and assessed differences in diet between individuals representing different genders and ontogenetic
stages. At the population level, C. constrictor foxii appears to support the pattern typical of a dietary
generalist; differences exist, however, when comparing prey taxa consumed by different life-history
stages and sexes.




                                                                                                         418
Lesbarreres, David (Laurentian University); Pauli, Bruce (Environment Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Conclusions & Perspectives on the Threats to Canadian Herpetofauna

While some hot spots are of particular concern, Canadian herpetofauna is as much at risk. In total, 20
amphibians and 37 reptiles are listed by the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada
(COSEWIC), from Special Concern (26%) to Threatened (28%) and Endangered (46%). With more than
6000 km from East to West and more than 40º latitude from North to South, Canada presents a diversity
of threats on its species at least equal to any other country. As this Symposium ends, scientists from all
over Canada will be developing new research collaborations and identifying strategies aimed at reducing
or preventing the loss of amphibian and reptile biodiversity. At a time when multidisciplinary approaches
are encouraged by both governmental and funding agencies, this symposium presents a unique
opportunity to bring together researchers with different research scope in order to improve our
understanding of the amphibian and reptile population declines in Canada.



Levasseur, Kathryn (University of South Carolina); Tilley, Dominic (Jumby Bay Hawksbill Project,
Canada)

Examining long-term trends in hawksbill turtle reproduction on Long Island, Antigua, West Indies

Although numerous marine turtle studies have compared the reproductive output of neophytes (first-time
nesters) and remigrants in nesting assemblages, few have accumulated enough long-term data to
examine reproductive longevity in individual turtles. With over two decades of comprehensive nesting
data for nearly 400 individuals, the Jumby Bay Hawksbill Project (JBHP) can begin to address questions
of long-term reproductive output. The JBHP has monitored Long Island, Antigua‘s nesting hawksbill
population with saturation tagging protocols (identifying nearly 100% of individuals) for 25 years. Many
remigrants have been documented nesting for over 15 years. Our objective with this investigation is to
evaluate within- and among-season changes in fecundity as hawksbills senesce. With data collected by
the JBHP, we use a subset of 46 individuals with six or more documented nesting seasons spanning 12
to 25 years. We examine several features of individual reproductive output, including remigration
intervals, number of clutches per season, inter-nesting intervals and clutch size. We evaluate these
reproductive parameters in two ways: with respect to individual age and nesting experience. Preliminary
results suggest that remigration intervals, inter-nesting intervals and clutch size remain constant over
time, and the number of clutches per season appears to decrease after remaining constant for many
nesting seasons. We also discuss the ecological and management implications of our findings and make
recommendations for future analyses to better understand the relationship between hawksbill senescence
and fecundity.



Levine, Brenna (University of Arkansas); Smith, Charles F (Wofford College, Canada); Douglas, Marlis R
(University of Arkansas, Canada); Davis, Mark A (University of Illinois, Canada); Beaupre, Steven J;
Douglas, Michael E (University of Arkansas, Canada)

Genetic Structure of the Copperhead (Viperidae: Agkistrodon contortrix) at its Most Northern
Distribution

Molecular tools have been used to survey dispersal, migration, inbreeding, effective population size,
reproductive success, and genetic diversity across a broad range of biodiversity, Their focus in North
American pit vipers has been on species that warrant conservation concern, or those with a broad



                                                                                                      419
literature base, such as Timber( Crotalus horridus ) and Massasauga rattlesnakes (Sistrurus catenatus).
Scant effort has been directed towards the molecular ecology of the Copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix),
other than to evaluate male reproduction and phylogenetic history. Thus, employing DNA-based
molecular techniques to study the natural history of A. contortrix will broaden our knowledge of
molecular ecology in North American pit vipers, and particularly in a non-threatened species that can
serve as a surrogate for threatened and endangered (T&amp;E) taxa. In this study, we employed 23
polymorphic tetra-nucleotide microsatellite loci to explore population parameters in A contortrix mokasen
at its most northern distribution. All loci were polymorphic, averaging 6.7 ( + 0.524) alleles per locus (253
individuals). Average relatedness was -0.004 ( + 0.045) and the average coefficient of inbreeding was
0.023 ( + 0.161). No significant differences were found in average relatedness between (and among)
males compared to females. Multiple paternity exists in this population in that several clutches with known
mothers were assigned to more than one male.            We also present estimates of relative reproductive
success, effective population size, dispersal, natal philopatry and fidelity to hibernacula.



Lewandowski, Justin (University of South Carolina); Allen, Dennis (University of South Carolina,
Canada); Greig, Thomas (NOAA/NOS/NCCOS, Canada); Quattro, Joseph (University of South Carolina,
Canada)

Genetic Stock Identification and Migration in Black Sea Bass (Centropristis striata) Along the
Western Atlantic Coast

The resilience of any managed species to exploitation is dependent upon management strategies that
incorporate crucial information suchas the reproductive capacity within (self-recruitment) and among
(migration,larval dispersal) distinct population segments (DPS). Population structure and demographics of
managed species need to be adequately understood to assess and refine current management plans.
The black sea bass ( Centropristis striata ) is a demersal fish (family Serranidae) found throughout the
western Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. It is known that two subspecies exist: C. striata striata in the
Atlantic, and C. striata melana in the Gulf. However, morphological and behavioral evidence has
suggested that two distinct populations exist in the Atlantic, north and south of Cape Hatteras. This has
been called the two-stock hypothesis. Whether or not there exists two stocks has important management
implications. If there are indeed two distinct stocks that are being managed as one single entity,
estimates of population size and, by extension, stock health, will be exaggerated. In addition, fishing
pressure based on these incorrect population estimates of a single larger population will have an
increased negative effect on both populations, and recruitment of new individuals from the alternate stock
for replenishment is limited or non-existent. To test the two-stock hypothesis, DNA samples have been
collected from throughout species‘ range from the late 1990s (year 1) and over a decade later (year 2); a
portion of the mitochondrial DNA control region as well as three nuclear loci were screened and the
genetic data analyzed. The results indicate that C. striata in the Atlantic are a largely (though relatively
recently) isolated, two-stock scenario with some very limited mixing between the two populations. This
crucial information on C. striata genetic stock structure will allow for the development of more informed
management strategies.




                                                                                                         420
Lewis, Brett (University of Kent); Wright, Amy (Lloyd Bore Landscape and Ecology Ltd, Canada)

Colonisation patterns of newly created ponds by great crested newts

Dispersal and colonisation is a fundamental property of amphibian population dynamics. However, the
mechanisms underlying these processes remain poorly understood. We examined the colonisation
patterns of four ponds by newts following their creation in 1998. Ten years later, we monitored the
responses of the newly established newt population to the creation of four further ponds immediately
adjacent to the existing ponds. Newts were first observed in the four original ponds in 1999 and numbers
stabilised at less than 20 individuals over the next few years. In 2006 the ponds were drained, relined and
refilled, removing all potential predators. Two years after the management the ponds underwent an
upsurge in recruitment to the population with adult numbers more than doubling. Following construction of
four new ponds in 2009 the population underwent a further increase of 25%. Not all individual newts
returned to breed in the ponds every year, but several newts that first colonised the ponds in 1999 are still
alive in 2012 and are therefore at least 13 years old. Newts were found to use both the old and newly
constructed ponds and showed no preference for either. Indeed, newts appeared to move freely between
both old and new ponds with only 27% of newts showing any sign of pond fidelity. Equally, newly created
ponds were colonised by a mix of established adults and new recruits. Invertebrate surveys revealed that
newly created ponds had fewer predators and prey than old ponds. Newts therefore face a trade-off in
terms of laying eggs in established ponds with more food but more predators, or new ponds with the
opposite. However, there were no significant differences between the numbers of larvae found in the old
or new ponds.

Newly created ponds are colonised rapidly if they are sited within existing amphibian habitats, and
pioneering colonisers are not confined to dispersing first-time breeders. Managing the old ponds and
doubling the aquatic habitat resulted in tripling of the population size within a few years. The present
study confirms the importance of wetland creation as breeding sites for amphibians and invertebrates.



Li, Chenhong (College of Charleston); Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, MUSC, Charleston, United
States); Hofreiter, Michi (York University, York, United Kingdom)

Leveraging NextGen sequencing for Systematics

Next generation sequences affords opportunities to collect DNA sequence data on a genomic scale.
However, the overhead associated with assembling and annotating genomes for downstream analyses
is time consuming and currently represents a significant bottleneck to comparative genomics.
Phylogenetic biologists are generally less interested in complete genomes than they are in obtaining
multiple nuclear orthologous markers across a set of taxa of interest. To date, no procedures have been
developed to facilitate the efficient collection of such data. We present a method that uses targeted
gene capture in conjunction with next generation sequencing techniques to obtain sequence data from
hundreds of orthologous protein coding sequences across multiple species in a single sequencing run.
We demonstrate the efficacy of the approach with chondrichthyan fishes.




                                                                                                         421
Liang, Shih-hsiung (National Kaohsiung Normal University); Li, Kuan-chung (National Kaohsiung
Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan); Shieh, Bao-Sen (KAOHSIUNG MEDICAL UNIVERSITY,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan)

Reproductive cycle and food composition of an invasive predacious fish, snakehead Channa
striata, in southern Taiwan

The objectives of this study are to investigate the reproductive cycle and food composition of an invasive
predacious fish, snakehead Channa striate, in southern         Taiwan .      The impact of this species on
endemic aquatic organisms was also evaluated.           From September 2008 to December 2010, 294
individuals were collected, included 164 females, 108 males, and 22 undetermined, from reservoirs,
streams, and wetlands in southern Taiwan . Females‘ mean              body depth, belly width and body
weight     were significantly greater than those of males. The food composition of C . striata included
fish, amphibians, reptilian, gastropods, crabs and aquatic insects.      According to the Gonadosomatic
Index value, the female C . striata is sexually mature at a minimum standard length of 23.5 cm , and
has a reproductive season lasted from July to September, but may possibly extend to all year round.
According to its reproductive cycle and feeding habit, C . striata have adapted the aquatic environments
in Taiwan , and its predacious impact would severely threat the endemic aquatic organisms within the
island. Suggestions to properly control and eliminate C . striata population in the field of Taiwan are
recommended.



Liedtke, Hans Christoph (Univeristy of Basel); Müller, Hendrik (Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Jena,
Germany); Menegon, Michele (Museo Tridentino di Scienze Naturali, Trento, Italy., Trento, Italy); Beck,
Jan; Ballesteros, Liliana; Nagel, Peter; Loader, Simon (University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland)

Do mountains promote terrestrialization of life history strategies in African amphibians?

Many amphibian lineages show a terrestrialization of their reproductive breeding strategy, though it is
unclear what causal factors are linked to this. Predation and habitat have been proposed as factors
driving the evolution of terrestrialized breeding strategies. The influence of habitat on the evolution of
terrestrialized breeding strategies has never been tested using appropriate data or methods. We test
whether species occurring across different habitats show different patterns of terrestrialization in their
breeding strategy. Based on species distribution data, we assembled a dataset comprising 180
amphibian species and coded life history modes for East African species. We tested whether montane
forest amphibian species have significantly different breeding strategies compared to lowland forest and
non-forest, and montane grassland communities. We show significant association between terrestrialized
breeding and montane forest assemblages. This result is robust to likely biases in the data. We also
accounted for phylogenetic non-independence in tests of correlations between habitat and breeding
strategies. Terrestrial oviposition is strongly correlated with montane forest habitat, but terrestrial
development is not. Various hypotheses have tried to explain the high frequency of terrestrial breeding
strategies in amphibian communities, and our analysis points to montane forest habitats being an
important factor in terrestrialization.




                                                                                                       422
Lind, Amy (USDA Forest Service); Kupferberg, S.J. (University of California, Berkeley, Canada); Yarnell,
S.M. (University of California, Canada); Palen, W.J. (Simon Frasier University, Canada)

Effects of altered stream flow regimes on California amphibians: Lessons from experiments and
population and habitat modeling for Rana boylii

Rivers are among the most impaired ecosystems in the world and many species of amphibians and fish
that depend on riverine environments are at risk. In western North America, California waterways embody
the full range of river management. Some have been transformed into cement-lined canals and many are
impounded by dams, with flows diverted or otherwise altered; only a few remain unimpaired. When
hydropower dams are relicensed, there are unique opportunities to improve flow regimes and habitats for
native species, such as the foothill yellow-legged frog ( Rana boylii ). Decline of this species has been
attributed to the flow regulation and habitat fragmentation associated with water storage and hydropower
dams. R. boylii is adapted to the wet winters and dry summers of California‘s Mediterranean climate;
breeding during the relatively predictable springtime transition from high to low flows. In a series of
studies, we have combined field and laboratory experiments with population and habitat models for R.
boylii to describe key flow-related habitat attributes and assess the implications of altered flow regimes
on the long-term viability of this species. Population metrics of this frog may strongly represent the
condition of both aquatic and riparian environments because this species depends on instream
environments for reproduction and recruitment, as well as streamside habitats post-metamorphosis. We
found that adults are selective about breeding sites and egg masses and tadpoles occupy a narrow range
of water depths, velocities, and temperatures in both regulated and unimpaired rivers. When alteration of
natural flow regimes shifts conditions outside this narrow range, mortality of early life stages ensues.
Population projection models illustrate how these effects translate to the population level resulting in
multi-fold increases in extinction risk. Hydrodynamic models of physical conditions, which use R. boylii -
specific habitat suitability criteria, provide a tool for assessing how different flow regimes may affect
aquatic lifestages. Coupling these tools with knowledge of natural flow regimes, in particular the
springtime snow-melt recession in mountainous regions of California, we have developed new water
management approaches for regulated rivers in hydropower relicensing procedures. These semi-natural
flow regimes may significantly improve conditions for this native frog and potentially for other similarly
adapted aquatic species.



Lingnau, Rodrigo (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná); Ahmann, Francielle S.; Evseev, Ivan
G.; Bortolini, Joseane (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Canada); Ievsieieva, Ievgeniia;
Assis, Joaquim T. (Instituto Politécnico - UERJ, Canada); Alves, Haimon D. L. (COPPE - UFRJ, Canada)

Comparison of skulls of the Proceratophrys bigibbosa species group (Anura: Cycloramphidae)
from south Brazil through x-ray computed microtomography

The Proceratophrys bigibbosa species group is characterized by the presence of postocular swellings
and absence of hornlike palpebral appendages. In south Brazil there are three species in this group:
Proceratophrys avelinoi , P. brauni and P. bigibbosa . The main difference is on body size of the three
species, beside some differences on advertisement calls, development of postocular swellings and
distribution of tubercles over the dorsum. The body size varies from the smaller P. avelinoi to the larger
P. bigibbosa , and P. brauni with an intermediate body size. As the external appearance of these three
members of the group is very similar to each other, it is interesting to have a better osteological
characterization of skulls of these species, until now based mostly on external appearance. Herein we
report on the results of a comparative skull morphological characterization of three species of the
Proceratophrys bigibbosa species group from south Brazil using the X-ray computed Microtomography



                                                                                                      423
technique through Skyscan 1174 system. Five samples of each three species, i.e. fifteen samples in total,
were scanned. The data obtained were reconstructed and analyzed using Skyscan software. The
reconstructed images were used to create a 3D head model and measure the craniums proportions. The
main result is that it is already possible to detect differences in skulls through a qualitative analysis of
visual images of the three species. From a frontal view, there are differences in the projection of the
tubercles above the ocular cavity between P. brauni and P. bigibbosa , being more developed in P.
brauni than in P. bigibbosa . From a dorsal view, it is possible to see that the surface of the
frontoparietals, including their ridges side in P. avelinoi is much smoother than for the other two species,
and in P. bigibbosa there is a greater projection of the ridge of the frontoparietal, reaching squamosal.
The computed tomography can be used for osteological characterization without destroying the samples;
it can also be useful in distinguishing specimens of collections where there is doubt about their
identification due to similar external morphology. Bearing in mind the advantage of the method, an
osteological characterization without destroying the sample, we can preview that computed
microtomography is highly promising for analysis of various species of amphibians and other taxa in
general, particularly in countries with a high biodiversity, like Brazil.



Lingnau, Rodrigo (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná); Savegnago, Leoberto; Toniazzo,
Fernando (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Canada)

Diversity and conservation of amphibians in areas under intense agricultural pressure in
southwestern Paraná, southern Brazil

The southwestern region of Parana state, in south Brazil, is characterized by an economy based on
agriculture, with extense areas with plantations of soybean, corn, wheat, beside beef and dairy cattle. The
region belongs to the Atlantic Forest biome, originally covered completely by a mixture of the so called
Araucaria Forest and a seasonal semideciduous forest. Human activities in this region caused a
enormous environmental degradation, and now the coverage of the Atlantic forest in southwestern
Paraná is estimated at only around 8%, composed mainly of little and isolated remnants. To contribute to
the knowledge and conservation of frogs in this region, from November 2010 to February 2012 we carried
out expeditions to four municipalities in southwestern Paraná (Palmas, Francisco Beltrão, Dois Vizinhos
and Coronel Domingos Soares). At Palmas was sampled an area of a conservation unit, where there are
grasslands, wet grasslands and extensive riparian forests of different streams. Francisco Beltrão and Dois
Vizinhos are two cities with large areas focused on agriculture, and surveys were made in small
remnants, and near water bodies in rural areas. In the city of Coronel Domingos Soares, who is one of
the cities with the highest percentage of remaining forest in southwestern Paraná, we sampled water
bodies as swamps, lakes and streams along 9km of the access road to the city. Potential threats to the
conservation of amphibian species were recorded for the areas and their surroundings. So far 23 species
were recorded in all four areas. The family Hylidae was the most representative, with 13 species, followed
by Leptodactylidae (3), and Cycloramphidae Leiuperidae (2), Bufonidae, Microhylidae and Ranidae (1),
the latter represented by the exotic bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus . Most species (96%, n = 22) used
permanent or temporary ponds in open areas. A single species, Hypsiboas curupi , was found restricted
to a small remnant riparian vegetation in the city of Dois Vizinhos, and also at a riparian forest in Palmas.
We could observe that the majority of the amphibian fauna in this area is composed by habitat
generalists, and species with broad geographic distribution. We also observed that the greatest impacts
to the conservation of frogs in the region are the supplementation of natural habitats by extensive areas
of agriculture, without respecting the laws for maintenance of riparian vegetation along rivers and
streams, and the presence of exotic species.




                                                                                                         424
Lingnau, Rodrigo (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná); Bastiani, Veluma I. M.; Lucas, Elaine
M. (Unochapecó, Canada)

Frogs from remnants of the Atlantic Forest hotspot in south Brazil

In southern Brazil, state of Santa Catarina, there is great anuran richness, still growing every year, with
descriptions of new species and increases on geographic distribution of some species within the state.
This situation hinders decision-making on the conservation of this taxonomic group and their associated
environments. Although the lack of basic information about the fauna, the state of Santa Catarina is
located entirely within the Atlantic Forest biome, considered the fifth among the 34 global hotspots of
biodiversity. To contribute for the knowledge and conservation of frogs in the Atlantic Forest, from
October 2010 until October 2011 three expeditions of ten consecutive days were done in three areas in
the highlands of Santa Catarina. The sampled areas were located in the municipalities of Vargem Bonita
(1,400 hectares), Concórdia (741 hectares) and Palma Sola (1.863 hectares). Anurans were surveyed by
active search of potential reproductive sites, such as ponds, permanent and temporary pools, ponds and
streams. Potential threats to the conservation of amphibian species were recorded for the areas and their
surroundings. Thirty species were recorded in the three areas, 14 in Vargem Bonita, 19 in Concórdia and
24 in Palma Sola. The family Hylidae was the most representative, with 14 species, followed by
Leptodactylidae (4) Cycloramphidae (3), Bufonidae and Leiuperidae (2), Brachycephalidae,
Centrolenidae, Hylodidae, Microhylidae and Ranidae (1), the latter represented by the exotic Lithobates
catesbeianus. Most species (80%, n = 24) used permanent and / or temporary ponds in open areas,
however, some habitat specialist such as Crossodactylus schmidti, Hypsiboas curupi, Limnomedusa
macroglossa, Proceratophrys bigibbosa and Vitreorana uranoscopa used mainly streams inside the
forest, and Ischnocnema henselii was found on leaf litter inside the forest. Among these habitat
specialists, C. schmidti and P. bigibbosa are considered as ―near threatened‖ at IUCN. The other habitat
specialists, although not included in any category at IUCN, could be regionally endangered due to various
local threats like as: strong presence of exotic species of fauna and flora; presence of pets; likely use of
pesticides in crops of the surrounding areas and selective removal of native vegetation of economic
interest. These threats are common throughout the plateau region of Santa Catarina, and may not affect
only amphibians, but several other groups of the biota.



Lips, Karen (University of Maryland); Caruso, Nick (University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United
States); Grant, Evan (USGS Patuxent, Canada); Muletz, Carly (University of Maryland, Canada);
Fleischer, Rob (Smithsonian Institution, Canada); McDiarmid, Roy (USGS/Smithsonina Institution,
Canada)

Spatial, temporal and taxonomic variation in patterns of population decline in Appalachian
Plethodontid salamanders

Highton (2005) documented widespread population declines in 28 species of Plethodon in the eastern
US by the 1980‘s, a pattern typical of infectious disease or climate change. Between June–October 2011,
we resurveyed 67 of Highton‘s sites, including 192 populations of 14 species of Plethodon over an area
of 767 km. Our goal was to compare current species presence and abundance to historic surveys, and to
determine whether Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) was present. At each site we sampled 3, 50 x
3m plots and captured all salamanders found under cover objects. We identified each capture to species,
sex, and age class; swabbed each animal for Bd ; and measured snout-to-vent length (SVL), mass and
body temperature. We captured a total of 1,870 salamanders (μ= 8.6/site; range = 0–75) of 14 species,
swabbed 1,400 animals at 62 sites, and analyzed 612 swabs. To determine whether Bd was present
historically, we swabbed museum specimens collected at 5 sites. Using results from contemporary field



                                                                                                        425
surveys and historic data collected from those same sites between 1957–96, we compared patterns of
occupancy among decades using multi-season dynamic occupancy models that account for incomplete
detection. We did not find one or more species at 71% (44/62) of sites and on average we found 1.02
species missing per site (range = 0–3). Species groups varied in the amount of population loss:
glutinosus were absent at 51% (31/63) of historic sites, welleri from 50% (3/6), cinereus from 24%
(14/59), and jordani from 6% (2/35).           We found a significant decrease in occupancy for the genus
across all sites (goodness-of-fit test; z = -3.552; p = 0.0004), with significantly greater decreases at higher
elevations and lower latitudes (z = -6.03; p &lt; 0.0001). Occupancy was initially 95% in 1950–1970,
dropped to 84% in 1980 and declined to 74% since 1990.             We detected low levels of infection (2–20
ZSE; μ = 7.25) by Bd in 4 individuals (0.7% prevalence) from Catoctin N.P., MD.                  qPCR of 258
museum specimens of cinereus and glutinosus species groups from Pisgah N.F. (1970-87) were
negative, as were 184 from Shenandoah N.P. (1957-65). Analyses of museum specimens continue, to
determine whether Bd was more prevalent historically. Our results support predictions of species loss
from higher elevations in the southern Appalachians as explained by projected changes in regional
climate (Milanovich et al. 2009). Future studies need to evaluate mechanisms of climate change on
populations.



Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian University); Seburn, David (Seburn Ecological Services, Ottawa, ON,
Canada)

Implementing recovery actions for freshwater turtles in Canada

Decreases in biodiversity and increases in human threats to the natural world have prompted government
agencies to create legislation to protect species at risk of extinction and their habitats. In Canada, at the
federal level there is the Species at Risk Act (SARA) which protects residence for threatened,
endangered, and extirpated species on federal lands. The federal government will also identify critical
habitat (habitat needed for survival) for threatened and endangered species. To date, critical habitat has
only been identified for one freshwater turtle, the Nova Scotia population of the Blanding‘s Turtle
(Emydoidea blandingii). At the provincial level in Ontario, there is the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
Species that may be at risk are reviewed by a team of experts (by COSEWIC at the federal level and by
COSSARO at the provincial level). If upon completion of review a species is listed as at risk, the
government is required to outline steps that will be taken towards species recovery in a Recovery
Strategy for endangered and threatened species, and in a Management Plan for species of special
concern. In Ontario, the government must respond to the Strategy or Plan within 9 months via a
Government Response Statement which summarizes their intended actions and priorities for species
recovery. The Canadian government created various funding programs to support stewardship activities
for species at risk, including the Habitat Stewardship Program, the Interdepartmental Recovery Fund, and
the Aboriginal Fund for Species at Risk. In 2007 the Ontario government created the Species at Risk
Stewardship Fund which provides funding on a competitive basis to individuals and organizations for
stewardship activities that support implementation of the ESA. Of the 8 species of turtles in Ontario, 7 of
which are considered to be at risk, to date only the Wood Turtle (endangered) has an approved provincial
Recovery Strategy and Government Response Statement, under which the species‘ habitat is regulated.
Case studies describing recovery actions for Canadian turtles will be discussed.




                                                                                                           426
Lloyd, Rhiannon (University of Portsmouth);

Amphibian cryobanking and associated advanced reproductive techniques

Biobanking (or cryobanking) is recognised as an essential and integral part of the IUCN Amphibian
Conservation Action Plan. Approximately one-third of the 6,260 amphibian species assessed to date are
described as critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable. Biobanks, containing e.g. germplasm
(sperm and eggs), embryos, somatic cells, and tissue, are a second line of defence against species
extinction. Biobanks have huge potential to serve as a resource for conservation research (e.g. samples
can be used to assess the current genetic diversity of a population) and, in association with assisted
reproduction techniques, breeding (e.g. sperm can be used to reintroduce genes periodically to maintain
the genetic diversity of a population). However, obtaining offspring using a combination of biobanked
samples (e.g. sperm cells) and simple assisted reproduction techniques (e.g. in vitro fertilisation) is often
limited due to the damage caused to the samples during the freezing and thawing, i.e. sub-optimal
cryoprotocols. The aim of this talk is two-fold. First, to provide a brief summary of the information gathered
during the 2010 Amphibian Ark Advisory Committee (ABAC) Workshop: Towards and Biobanking
Strategy for Amphibian Conservation (co-hosted by the Zoological Society of London and European
Xenopus Resource Centre (Portsmouth), UK) and the 2011 ABAC Survey: Global Biobanking Activities.
Second, to review a number of advanced reproductive techniques (e.g. intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection,
nuclear transfer and primordial germ cell transfer), which have arisen from the study of laboratory
amphibians and other taxa, that could be used in combination with biobanked samples, even if they have
been cryopreserved sub-optimally. Such advanced reproductive techniques are likely to be key to
biobanks fulfilling their potential as amphibian conservation breeding tool.



Lock, Brad (Zoo Atlanta);

An in situs Conservation Program for Guatemala's Endangered Herpetofauna

Only 150-200 Guatemalan Beaded Lizards, Heloderma horridum charlesbogerti, remain in the wild. This
species is listed as vulnerable by the IUCN was elevated to CITES I status in 2009. The spiny-tailed
iguana, Ctenoasura palearis, is listed by the IUCN as critically endangered. Severe pressures including
habitat loss and degradation, illegal collection, food consumption and, until recently indiscriminate killing
by locals due to negative myths about the Beaded Lizard threaten these species with imminent extinction.
With no reports of live individuals, the Guatemalan Beaded Lizard was thought to be extinct in the mid-
1990s. Zootropic began a long term, integrated conservation program in 2001. This program incorporates
field research, public education, local community capacity building and habitat protection.

In the nine plus years that Zootropic‘s program has been active the Beaded Lizard has become a flagship
species for the MotaguaValley and the impetus for the government of Guatemala to undertake initiatives
to conserve its dry forest habitat. With DWCF support in 2007, 200, 2009 and 2011 we were able to
expand the educational program to encompass the entire school age population of the villages
surrounding the Motagua valley and to date have presented this conservation awareness message to
over 45,000 children. Before this program beaded lizards were killed on site and now we have villagers
working with the program to preserve these species and their habitat. In 2007 the best remaining large
tract of land was purchased and a research facility was constructed in 2010. This facility has begun to
generate revenue through the hosting of conservation workshops, university classes and visiting
scientists. This has led to direct financial benefit for the local villagers who have participated in the
construction of the facility as well as through the provision of services to the facility. As a direct result of
Project Heloderma, over 3,500 hectares of habitat (both governmental and private) have been registered



                                                                                                            427
as official protected areas. The partners in Project Heloderma are now expanding this model to another
critically endangered group of lizards in Project Abronia.



Lomas, Emily (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada);
Bishop, Christine A. (Environment Canada, Canada)

Effects of Habitat Development and Human Disturbance on the Northern Pacific Rattlesnake in
Osoyoos, British Columbia

The South Okanagan region of British Columbia, Canada, is undergoing drastic landscape changes to
meet the needs of expanding tourism and agriculture industries. The Northern Pacific Rattlesnake
(Crotalus oreganus oreganus) is one of many local endangered species. Altered land-use and increased
human activity has the potential to negatively affect snake behaviour, body characteristics, and spatial
ecology, yet little work has been done in the region to evaluate the response of snakes to such
disturbances. Using a 10 year mark-recapture data set (2002-2011) and multi-year radio-telemetry study,
we investigated disturbance effects on rattlesnake size, body condition, behaviour, and movement
patterns in a 470 ha region of Osoyoos, British Columbia. Snakes were classified along a gradient of
increasing disturbance, based on the intensity and proximity of human-use in the area in which they were
found. As the intensity of disturbance increased, snakes showed significantly lower body condition
(represented by the residuals from the log-log linear regression of mass on length). Additionally, males
and non-gravid females found in sites exempt from human presence were heavier and longer than
snakes in all other areas. Mean visibility (exposure from cover objects) of adult males in 2010 and 2011
varied significantly with substrate temperature, but did not differ between disturbed and undisturbed sites.
Although at this time we cannot identify the specific factors affecting snakes in this region (e.g. potential
low quality and quantity of prey), snakes in human-disturbed landscapes clearly appear susceptible to
negative effects from land development. Body condition and growth rate changes may affect over-winter
mortality rates and selection, resulting in changes in population demographics over time. Any or all of
these factors may destabilize these vulnerable snake populations.



Longo, Ana V (Cornell University); Lips, Karen R. (University of Maryland, Canada); Zamudio, Kelly R.
(Cornell University, Canada)

Identifying targets of the amphibian-killing fungus: Insights from a devastated Neotropical
amphibian community

During the well-documented outbreak of the amphibian-killing fungus ( Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis,
Bd ) at El Copé, Panamá, this emergent pathogen caused major biodiversity losses at the taxonomic,
lineage and phylogenetic levels. We investigated the initial species response after the arrival of Bd by
focusing on two host defense strategies: resistance and tolerance. Resistance involves hosts limiting
pathogen load and thus inducing a cost to Bd , while tolerance controls disease damage at the expense
of the host. Evidence from single-host populations indicates that host density alone determines disease
outcome, with high densities causing extirpation and low densities allowing persistence. We hypothesize
that, in addition to density, heterogeneity in host defenses may be an important mechanism for disease
transmission in diverse amphibian communities. Here, we demonstrate how a naïve Neotropical
amphibian community composed of dozens of species with high transmission heterogeneity showed
similar responses to the invasion by Bd . We show that host-specific ecology, evolutionary history and
density predicted infection intensity and species survival, and that the presence of highly infectious



                                                                                                         428
species dictated community response during the epizootic. The persistence of resistant species six years
post-decline significantly decreased infection risk in the community. These findings have important
implications for the coevolution of antagonistic interactions between amphibians and Bd . Using long-
term data from field studies allows us to position amphibian taxa on the Bd resistance-susceptibility
continuum, predict new epidemics, and improve the design of mitigation strategies enhancing tolerance
levels.



Longrich, Nicholas (Yale University); Bullar, Bhart-Anjan (Harvard University, Canada); Gauthier,
Jacques (Yale University, Canada)

Coniophis precedens: a transitional snake from the Late Cretaceous of North America

Snakes are the most diverse group of living reptiles, but their origins and early evolution remain poorly
understood due to a lack of transitional forms. Several major questions remain outstanding: did snakes
originate in a marine or terrestrial environment, and how did their unique feeding mechanism evolve? The
late Cretaceous Coniophis precedens was among the first Mesozoic snakes discovered, but until now
only an isolated vertebra has been described, and so it has been overlooked in discussions of snake
evolution. Here, we report previously undescribed material from this 65 million year old snake, including
the maxilla, dentary, and additional vertebrae. We show that Coniophis is a stem snake, not an anilioid
as previously thought. Accordingly, its morphology and ecology are critical to understanding snake
evolution. Coniophis exhibits fossorial adaptations and occurs in a continental floodplain environment,
consistent with a terrestrial rather than a marine origin of snakes. The skull is intermediate between that
of lizards and snakes. Hooked teeth and an intramandibular joint indicate that Coniophis fed on relatively
large, soft--‐bodied prey. However, the maxilla is firmly united with the premaxilla, palate, jugal, and
nasals, indicating an akinetic rostrum. Coniophis therefore represents a transitional snake, combining a
snake-‐like body and a lizard--like head. Subsequent to the evolution of a serpentine body and
macrocarnivory, snakes evolved a highly specialized, kinetic skull, which was followed by a major
adaptive radiation in the Early Cretaceous.



Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University);

Natural History of the Little-Known Horned Anole of Ecuador, Anolis proboscis, and its equally
little-known relative, Phenacosaurus orcesii

The natural history of South American anoles is generally little known, and nowhere is this more true than
that of the horned anole of Ecuador. Until recently known only from six male specimens, and not seen for
40 years, the biology of this species--and the use of its horn--is virtually unexplored. Here, we report
observations on the habitat use, behavior, and morphology of this species. In addition to discovering
tantalizing details about the horn, we also test the hypothesis that this species is similar to twig anoles of
the Caribbean. We also examine the natural history of the Ecuadorian species Anolis (Phenacosaurus)
orcesi, the natural history of which was previously unknown and which also is similar in appearance to a
twig anole.




                                                                                                          429
Lötters, Stefan (Trier University);

An incomplete explanation of the evolution of Amazonian Atelopus

Harlequin toads, genus Atelopus, are a diverse group of New World amphibians. Ongoing research
suggests that their diversity in the Amazon basin and its vicinities is difficult to interpret when it comes to
the question what is a species. One reason is that data remain sparse when attempting to view
populations in an integrative taxonomic approach. Another is the occurrence of 'extremes'. On the one
hand, there are early Neogene lineages which, by morphology, are hard to distinguish from others but
appear as potential cryptic species in molecular phylogenies. On the other hand, differences in body plan
(e.g. presence vs. absence of stapes) and coloration a priori suggest other populations to represent
distinct species, which show rather limited molecular divergence and are apparently the result of very
recent (Pleistocene) splits. The Disturbance Vicariance hypothesis may help explaining diversity in
younger lineages, especially for populations associated with higher elevations. It fails, however, to explain
populations - both of early Neogene and Pleistocene origin - which are pure lowland dwellers. Especially
older lineages can be found today in areas where it is unlikely that they had occurred during Pliocene and
Pleistocene. Does long-distance 'river rafting' play a role?



Lotti, Matthew (University of Rhode Island); Wetherbee, Bradley (University of Rhode Island, Kingston,
RI, United States); Grace, Mark; Driggers, William (NOAA/NMFS/SEFSC, Pascagoula, Pascagoula, MS,
United States)

At-vessel mortality and related factors among three carcharhinid sharks caught by fisheries-
independent bottom longline surveys in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico and the Northwest Atlantic Ocean

Mortality rates among commercially-caught elasmobranchs in the US must be carefully monitored to
ensure stock sizes are not declining past renewable levels. Catch limits restrict fishermen from excess
shark retention, but if discarded individuals suffer high levels of at-vessel mortality, less protection is
offered by such management. The U.S. commercial bottom longline fishery utilizes gear soak times in
excess of 9 hours and this soak period that has been shown to correlate to at-vessel mortality for many
shark species, especially among those that use obligate ram ventilation. The NOAA/NMFS/Southeast
Fisheries Science Center, Mississippi Laboratories bottom longline survey utilizes only 1 hour soak times
per set. However, even with a reduced soak time, at-vessel mortality still occurs. The purpose of this
research was twofold: 1.To determine mortality rates for three shark species commonly-caught by
commercial bottom longline fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico and western North Atlantic: scalloped
hammerhead Sphyrna lewini , blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus , and Atlantic sharpnose Rhizoprionodon
terraenovae; 2. Investigate specific biological, technical, and environmental factors correlated to at-vessel
mortality in light of a controlled soak-time. At-vessel mortality after 1 hr was found to be &gt;11% for S.
lewini, C. limbatus, and R. terraenovae . The probability of at-vessel mortality was found to decrease for
each species as length and bottom DO content increased. For S. lewini , males were found to have a
higher probability of at-vessel mortality than females. Among C. limbatus, sharks caught on J hooks
were found to have greater probability of at-vessel mortality than those caught on circle hooks. For R.
terraenovae, the probability of at-vessel mortality was found to increase with bottom water temperature.
Restricting the commercial bottom longline shark fishery from areas of low DO may decrease rates of
shark at-vessel mortality, and with it, potential discard mortality. Use of circle hooks over J hooks is
recommended to reduce at-vessel mortality among C. limbatus . Additionally, fishing in lower
temperature areas may serve to reduce at-vessel mortality among R. terraenovae . These results may
facilitate the creation of more species-specific management for elasmobranchs.




                                                                                                           430
Lotzkat, Sebastian (Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Naturmuseum);

Reptile diversity and distribution in the highlands of western Panama


The Cordillera Central of western Panama constitutes the eastern half of the Lower Central American, or
Talamancan, highlands, which separate the perhumid Caribbean from the seasonally subhumid Pacific
lowlands throughout most of Costa Rica and western Panama. Especially in the latter country,
herpetological surveys of these mountains have long been of punctual nature, leaving large stretches
unexplored and many issues regarding taxonomy and biogeography unsolved. Over the past decade,
more and more localities within this rugged mountain chain have been visited by herpetologists. Between
2008 and 2010, I have spent 12 months in the Comarca Ngöbe-Buglé as well as the provinces of Bocas
del Toro, Chiriquí, and Veraguas of western Panama, visited more than 35 generalized localities, and
together with accompanying students collected over 850 well-documented squamate specimens currently
understood to represent 112 species. Among these and other vouchers, I gathered and compared
morphological as well as 16S and COI mtDNA data to assess intraspecific variation and species
boundaries. For a comprehensive biogeographical picture, I have collected several thousands of locality
records from literature and collection databases.

The collection of new material along with the application of integrative taxonomy considerably
complement our knowledge of reptilian diversity in western Panama. Distributional range extensions for
known species, discoveries of secretive organisms formerly unknown to science, and the identification of
cryptic lineages within species complexes have noticably lengthened the respective species lists. Against
this background, the multitude of newly generated distributional records now allows to approximate the
actual geographic distribution of several taxa for the first time. This applies to recently described
endemics of high or intermediate elevations as well as to common lowland species. Reptile species
occurring in Panama‘s Cordillera Central typically exhibit one of the following four distributional patterns:
(1) More or less widespread lowland species like Basiliscus basiliscus and Spilotes pullatus reach up to
premontane or montane elevations along the Caribbean and/or Pacific versant; (2) ―Golfo Dulce
endemics‖ like Potamites apodemus and Lachesis melanocephala are restricted to the Pacific lowlands
and adjacent premontane elevations of eastern Costa Rica and western Panama; (3) ―Talamancan
highland endemics‖ like Anolis salvini and Rhadinaea calligaster occur over large parts of the Lower
Central American highlands, i.e., along well more than one hundred kilometers of premontane and/or
montane elevations in both Panama and Costa Rica; (4) Small-scale highland endemics like Anolis
benedikti and Geophis talamancae are known only from a few rather contiguous localities and appear to
be restricted to usually well less than one hundred kilometers at premontane and/or montane elevations.
In the latter context, special emphasis must be placed on the blatantly underexplored Serranía de
Tabasará comprising the eastern continuous part of the Cordillera Central, between the Fortuna
depression and Santa Fé. This range of difficult access harbors a set of small-scale highland endemics of
its own, whereas its natural habitats find themselves seriously threatened with destruction owing to a
desastrous socioeconomic setting. Most of this mountain chain falls within the indigenous autonomy
territory Comarca Ngöbe-Buglé, where extreme poverty drives the growing population to increasingly
exploit the natural resources while legendary metal deposits attract foreign mining interests. Since the
greatest part of the Serranía de Tabasará is completely devoid of protected areas, its proper endemics
are facing an uncertain future.




                                                                                                         431
Loudon, Fiona (University of Western Sydney); Strassmeyer, Alana; Harland, Karen (University of
Western Sydney, Canada); Spencer, Ricky-John (Univeristy of Western Sydney, Canada)

Circadian Rhythms of Heart Rates in Amniotic Eggs

Oviparous species such as turtles are ideal for investigating endogenous physiological circadian rhythms
during embryogenesis with minimal influence of maternal biorhythms and the advantage of being able to
manipulate the external environment after oviposition occurs. As ectothermic animals, many physiological
processes in turtles are closely related to environmental temperature. Turtle embryos were thought to be
thermally passive however they can control, to an extent, their metabolic rates when stimulated by more
developed clutchmates, and through movement within the egg when exposed to heat gradients. This
study was designed to monitor embryonic heart rates in an ectothermic oviparous species, the short
necked Murray River turtle, Emydura macquarii, to determine if heart rates were constant during
development in the absence of external cues. Eggs were incubated at constant temperature (26oC and
30oC) and only exposed to light during transfer from the incubator to the digital egg monitoring system.
Heart rates were recorded at six hour intervals over 24 hours every seven days throughout development.
Circadian rhythms were detected in week four of incubation and continued until hatching. Heart rates
were not related to the time of day and varied by up to 20% throughout the 24 hour period. This study
found that endogenous circadian rhythms of heart rate are established early during embryogenesis. The
results also suggest external environmental cues are needed to establish developmental rates and
coordinate hatching and emergence from the nest. Initial investigations into individual heart rates and
heart rate synchronisation within a clutch will also be discussed.



Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University);

Phylogeographic perspectives on conservation of Canadian herpetofauna. Past insights and
future research.

Over the last 2 decades, the phylogeographic literature has burgeoned to include over 20,000 articles.
These papers collectively have helped us to understand the effects of Pleistocene-induced range
fragmentation and postglacial population dynamics on genealogical relationships within species. They
also have provided insights into the impacts of orogenesis, riverine barriers, changing sea levels and
historical vegetation shifts on rates and patterns of diversification, and have revealed cryptic species (by
no means is this an exhaustive list). Importantly, some phylogeographic research has provided key inputs
into conservation strategies for species listed as vulnerable or endangered, primarily in the domain of
prioritization of focal populations. However, in my view there remain some key deficits in our knowledge
particularly in the application of phylogeographic data to conservation and management of species at risk.
Relevant questions include: 1. Do diagnosed lineages in any way reflect adaptive diversity or potential? 2.
Are well-supported lineages identified in phylogeographic studies incipient species? 3. What are the
consequences of secondary contact and are these crucibles of new species origins? In this talk, I will use
published studies and data from my own laboratory to explore these issues with a focus on Canadian
herpetofauna.




                                                                                                        432
Lovich, Jeff (U.S. Geological Survey); Agha, Mickey; Liszewski, Meaghan (U.S. Geological Survey,
Flagstaff, AZ, United States)

Climatic variation predictably affects clutch phenology in Agassiz's Desert Tortoise (Gopherus
agassizii)

Phenology is the study of the timing and environmental causes both biotic and abiotic of biological events
and life cycles. We studied clutch phenology of an Agassiz‘s Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii)
population at a wind energy generation facility near Palm Springs, California for seven field seasons from
1997-2011, and at Joshua Tree National Park in 1998. Using radiotelemetry and X-radiography we
quantified variation in the following phenophases based on the number of calendar days since 1 January:
appearance and disappearance of first and second clutches, and interclutch intervals between first and
second clutches. Third clutches were only observed in five of seven years, produced by seven different
females, none of which produced more than one triple clutch during the entire period of study, so they
were not included in some statistical analyses. During the course of the study, shelled eggs were visible
from as early as 11 April to as late as 28 July, and the total length of time that eggs were visible differed
statistically among years. Appearance of first clutches in cool years was later than in warm years. After
controlling for maternal effects, we observed statistically significant interannual variation in all
phenophases except for interclutch intervals. Based on known and inferred oviposition dates in 2011,
females dropped their eggs 1-12 days (x = 6.4) after they were last visible in X-radiographs. Using degree
day methodology we calculated heat unit accumulation (HUA) during the post-hibernation and nesting
season for each year. After setting our biofix to the approximate date of emergence from hibernation
(March 1) at a minimum threshold temperature of 17.8o C we calculated HUA to various clutch
phenological events. We then used minimum HUA during two time periods to predict the mean date of
first clutch appearance in subsequent years, with 1-6 day accuracy. We also tested the broader
application of HUA against reproduction data collected at Joshua Tree National Park, and predicted first
clutch appearance within one day. HUA, as it relates to clutch phenology, has important management and
climate modeling implications for predicting phenophases in the reproductive cycle of the federally
threatened Desert Tortoise.



Lovich, Robert (U.S. Navy);

Herpetological Success Stories, and updates from the United States Department of Defense

The United States Department of Defense (DoD) properties contain the highest density of endangered
species and habitats of any federal landowner in the United States. Likewise, herpetofaunal diversity and
abundance on DoD lands is considerable. With 29 million acres of habitats within the United States, DoD
has a wealth of herpetological success stories. Herein I will highlight some of the many examples of DoD
and the respective military services contributions to the conservation, management, and research on
herpetofauna through time, including the recent formation of DoD PARC and its accomplishments. The
DoD maintains a unique role of stewarding some of the finest natural resources in the United States,
while prioritizing national defense mission requirements.




                                                                                                         433
Lowe, Christopher (California State University Long Beach); Alexander, Xydes; Forney, Christina; Manii,
Esfandiar; Moline, Mark; Clark, Christopher (California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo,
San Luis Obispo, CA, United States)

The future of elasmobranch behavior research: The development and utility of smart shark
tracking robots

The evolution of acoustic telemetry tracking technology has significantly advanced our knowledge and
understanding of elasmobranch behavior. Yet despite these advancements there are still logistical and
economic limitations to characterizing behavior of shark and rays in the wild. To reduce some of these
constraints we have developed an automated acoustic telemetry tracking system for characterizing the
diel fine-scale movement patterns and habitat use of highly mobile coastal elasmobranchs. This system
utilizes a team of customized Iver2 Ocean Server autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) equipped with
paired hydrophones and receivers. AUVs are able to track a tagged shark and determine its position
using particle filter estimation, while simultaneously characterizing the seafloor and water column
surrounding the shark. Experiments demonstrate that localization of stationary and mobile transmitters in
coastal environments and autonomous tracking of tagged leopard sharks using AUVs have position
estimation errors better than those obtained via manned active tracking. Specialized AUV controller
programming is designed to reduce behavioral interference, while identifying and characterizing changing
patterns of movement.



Lowe, Katrin (Griffith University); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Southport, Australia)

Acid frogs can stand the heat: morphological and ecological responses to fire.

Natural disturbance events such as fire can have varying effects on species ecology and morphology.
Knowledge of amphibian responses to fire is limited, with species and population responses varying
among studies. Such variation is attributed to differences in fire regimes; sampling methodologies;
historical exposure to fire, and the natural history of species and populations. Even less is known about
morphological responses of amphibians post-fire. Acid frogs occupy a discrete ecological niche being
restricted to fire-adapted acidic coastal wallum wetlands of eastern Australia. Visual encounter surveys
were conducted monthly over two years at sites spanning the latitudinal range of Litoria olongburensis, to
examine short and long-term responses of three threatened acid frog species (L. olongburensis, L.
freycineti, and Crinia tinnula) to fire. Fires altered the thermal properties of habitats by increasing
substrate temperatures and widening daily temperature ranges. Acid frog populations did not suffer
adversely from at least moderate intensity fires, as suitable refuges were available, including standing
water. All species were present shortly after fire and successful reproduction of all species occurred once
wetlands were sufficiently inundated to sustain tadpoles until metamorphosis. These observations
suggest that these frogs are highly adaptable and able to breed in radically fire-altered environments.
Spatial variation in relative abundance of the three species responded differently to long-term fire history,
highlighting the importance of assessing community-wide responses to fire. Furthermore, L.
olongburensis displayed colour morph variation across their range over different spatial and temporal
scales. Spatial variation in overall colour morph frequencies was strongly correlated with time-since-fire
and vegetation colour. Gradual temporal changes in morph frequencies were evident across seasons,
with more abrupt frequency changes following a fire. Hence, colour morph variation might be explained by
individual colour change in response to abrupt changes in vegetation colour due to fire. This study
demonstrates the dynamic responses of acid frogs to fire, and the adaptability and resilience of these
frogs in fire-prone landscapes.




                                                                                                         434
Luer, Carl (Mote Marine Laboratory); Walsh, Cathy; Ritchie, Kim; Yordy, Jennifer; Miedema, Jodi (Mote
Marine Laboratory, Canada); Bodine, A.B. (Clemson University, Canada); Cannons, Andrew; Luna, Vicki
(USF Center for Biological Defense, Canada)

Antimicrobial Properties of Epidermal Mucus from Two Species of Ray (Cownose Ray, Rhinoptera
bonasus, and Atlantic Stingray, Dasyatis sabina)

The protective secretion produced by epidermal mucus cells in stingrays is being investigated to identify
mucus-associated antimicrobial compounds with the potential for development into novel therapeutics to
treat wound infection pathogens. Freshly obtained epidermal mucus from cownose rays ( Rhinoptera
bonasus ), and Atlantic stingrays ( Dasyatis sabina ) can be separated by gentle centrifugation into an
aqueous supernatant and a viscous pellet. The aqueous supernatant contains at least 20 proteins/protein
subunits based on SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Chemical extraction of fresh mucus with 1)
Tris-EDTA, 2) acetic acid and solid phase extraction, and 3) selected surfactants (Triton X-100, Tween
80, and N-octylglucoside) results in partial purification of mucus compounds. Fresh mucus also contains
bacterial symbionts that are not seawater contaminants. Forty-six of 384 bacterial isolates cultured from
R. bonasus and 49 of 227 isolates from D. sabina epidermal mucus demonstrated antibiotic activity
against at least one human pathogenic tester strain in primary screens performed at Mote Marine
Laboratory. Of the 46 R. bonasus isolates, 13 demonstrated antimicrobial activity against a different
panel of pathogenic bacterial tester strains when screened at University of South Florida Center for
Biological Defense. Using the GenBank database, BLAST searches performed on 16S rDNA sequence
data identified six different genera among 22 of the 49 D. sabina -derived bacterial isolates that produced
antibacterial compounds against various tester strains. Some of the active isolates not genetically
confirmed with the database could be undescribed organisms. Culturable libraries of all isolates have
been cryopreserved.



Luhring, Thomas (University of Missouri); Holdo, Ricardo (University of Missouri, Canada)

Body Size as an Adaptation for Drought Survival in Stochastic Aquatic Environments: An Age-
Structured Approach

In the Southeastern United States, two families of ―giant salamanders‖ have evolved to live in a variety of
aquatic habitats. Amphiumidae and Sirenidae each contain species that diverged in body size and are
capable of surviving periodic droughts by aestivating in wetland sediments. Although both families have
followed different evolutionary histories, each has diversified into a few species that differ primarily in size.
Using sirenids as a case study, we constructed demographic models to investigate the effects of
environmental stochasticity (in the form ofdrought regimes) on persistence of species with contrasting life
history strategies. The two species we model differ in their time to maturation, which determines the
intrinsic rate of population growth as well as maximum size, which in turn determines survival under
drought conditions. We used an age-structured approach, with density-dependent fecundity and size-
dependent mortality data derived from published sources for the two species. Simulations (with identical
environmental parameters for both species) consisted of 5000-year runs in a simulated wetland subjected
to stochastic drought events varying in mean duration. In models without competition, persistence
decreased sigmoidally with drought duration.        Increase in body size caused an upward shift in the
threshold drought severity needed to precipitate extinction. We conducted a global sensitivity analysis for
each species model to determine what demographic parameters had the greatest influence on model
behavior. Maximum mass attained was the most important variable driving extinction events.                   For
models with competition, variation in competition strength from heterospecifics changed model output



                                                                                                             435
only when mean drought severity was low enough to permit the smaller species to persist. Results
fromthis model indicate that regional drought maintains divergent life-history strategies in sirenids as a
temporally selective agent on body size.



Luhring, Thomas (University of Missouri); Earl, Julia; Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri,
Canada)

Island in the Sun; Nutrient Cycling in isolated systems is mediated by canopy cover, predation
and the complex life-histories of their transient tenants

Limitation of nutrients in ecosystems has wide-reaching effects on community composition and system
functions. Although we are beginning to understand the impacts of the movement of nutrients between
donor and recipient systems, the majority of these studies focus on trophic effects of nutrient import from
a large diffuse area into a relatively smaller and finite recipient system. In this study, we investigate the
effects of nutrient dynamics on a finite donor system (isolated wetlands) that exports nutrients (in the form
of amphibian metamorphs) into a large and diffuse recipient system (terrestrial uplands). We used
outdoor mesocosms (n=72) to simulate aquatic systems varying in canopy cover (high or low) and
community composition (four single species treatments, two multispecies community treatments, and a no
amphibian control) to test for effects of life-history differences, community effects, and predation on
nutrient cycling within aquatic systems. In addition to influencing local nutrient cycling, metamorphosed
amphibian juveniles represent a nutrient loss from the aquatic (donor) system to the terrestrial system
(recipient) that is proportional to their biomass export. Depletion of Nitrogen and Phosphorus levels in
amphibian mesocosms (compared to background rates in control tanks) were generally strongest and
related to the timing of metamorphosis of anurans. Community tanks with predators (adult newts) had
reduced anuran survivorship and higher total phosphorus and total nitrogen than community tanks without
predators. Although we tested the effects of community composition on biomass and nutrient export, bi-
phasic amphibians transport nutrients from terrestrial to aquatic (i.e., egg masses) and aquatic to
terrestrial systems (i.e., emigration of metamorphosed juveniles). The temporal separation and net
movement of these subsidies warrants future research into their ecological significance. These results not
only reinforce the role of amphibians as key players in nutrient cycling, but provide further empirical data
for investigating the effects of spatial subsidies on both recipient and donor systems.



Luken, Alissa N. (California State University, Northridge); Espinoza, Robert E. (California State
University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Temperature-Dependent Sprint Performance of Nocturnal and Diurnal Geckos: Does Dollo's Law
Apply to Physiological Traits?

One of the most intriguing and rare phenomena in evolutionary biology is the occurrence of evolutionary
reversals because of the presumed difficulty of re-evolving ―lost‖ traits (Dollo‘s law). Previous tests of
Dollo‘s law have focused on morphologicaltraits, perhaps because physiology is considered more
evolutionarily labile. Most of the world‘s 1200+ gecko species are nocturnal and active at body
temperatures that are suboptimal for performance. Yet, geckos descended from diurnal lizards, which are
generally active near their thermal optimum. Several gecko lineages have independently reversed to
diurnality. We tested whether reversals to diurnality in geckos are associated with a return to performance
levels of diurnal lizards or whether their long history of nocturnality has compromised gecko performance.
We hypothesized that diurnality in geckos would be associated with faster sprints at warmer temperatures



                                                                                                         436
(as for typical diurnal lizards) and slower sprints at lower temperatures compared to closely related
nocturnal geckos. Following Dollo‘s law, we predicted that the maximum performance of diurnal geckos
would not approach values of typical diurnal lizards. We used a comprehensive phylogeny of geckos to
identify the nocturnal sister taxa of secondarily diurnal geckos. A total of 28 gecko species was sprinted at
five ecologically relevant temperatures and maximum sprint performance was determined for each
temperature. While most (71%) of the species in our study had typical performance curves (i.e., slowest
sprints tended to occur at the lowest body temperature and declined again at the highest body
temperature), two species had performance curves that continued to increase with temperature, two
species had curves that increased initially and then reached a plateau, and four species had curves that
fit a third-order polynomial function. Sprints of species pairs analyzed to date (three nocturnal:diurnal
pairs), show no difference in temperature-dependent sprint performance between the nocturnal and
diurnal species. This may indicate that thermal physiology is evolutionarily conserved in geckos; however,
data from additional species are needed to determine whether this pattern is widespread.



Lukey, Natasha (University of Waterloo); Cunnington, David (Environment Canada- Canadian Wildlife
Service, Canada); Ashpole, Sara; Murphy, Stephen (University of Waterloo, Canada); Govindarajulu,
Purnima (British Columbia Ministry of Enviroment, Canada)

Where do we go from here? Long-term, Adaptive Management of Invasive American Bullfrogs
(Lithobates catesbeiana) in the South Okanagan Valley, British Columbia

American Bullfrogs, Lithobates catesbeiana, significantly and negatively impact ecosystems. Alien
bullfrogs out-compete, predate upon, and transmit diseases to native amphibians. Since their introduction
in the 1950's, bullfrogs have been detected in 5 wetlands in the South Okanagan region of British
Columbia, Canada. We developed a three-tiered, adaptive management system in response to the
bullfrog threat. The first management tier is physical removal of, and active monitoring for, bullfrogs of all
stages. Removal has resulted in significant reduction in bullfrog detections from a high of 73 adults and/or
juveniles in 2005, to 4 adults and/or juveniles in 2010. Following the low number of detections in 2010, we
installed automated recording devices at 2 of the 5 infected water bodies in 2011. Continued visual and
in-person auditory detection efforts, combined with the audio recordings, yielded 0 bullfrog detections in
2011. The second management tier assesses risk levels for future colonization or recolonization post-
removal. Maximum entropy habitat suitability modeling in conjunction with effort analysis will determine
the proportion of wetlands vulnerable to recolonization post-removal, and help predict human and
financial resources required for continued population suppression. Habitat suitability modeling has shown
permanent, stagnant wetlands surrounded by agriculture to be at highest risk for bullfrog invasion. The
third management tier incorporates stakeholder awareness and education to facilitate monitoring of
bullfrog populations. We distributed surveys to stakeholder groups (school teachers, neighboring
landowners, vector businesses, and the general public), to measure each group's level of knowledge of
bullfrog presence, identification, and reporting. Fifty percent or more of all target groups were not
confident with identifying and/or reporting bullfrogs. To achieve long-term suppression and potential
eradication, we recommend continued stakeholder education to improve bullfrog identification and
reporting, reduced but continuing in-person detection effort, expanded monitoring using automated
recording devices, and continued habitat suitability model and effort analysis. This three tiered
management system provides a strong example of a successful invasive species risk assessment and
management approach to vertebrate invasions outside the Okanagan Valley, Canada.




                                                                                                          437
Lumbantobing, Daniel (The George Washington University);

Osteology of the Gill Arches of the Subfamily Danioninae (Teleostei; Cyprinidae)

 Danioninae, with approximately 320 species in 51 genera, is one of the most species-rich teleost
subfamilies. Despite such diversity, let alone the growing interest in the biology of some of its species,
little is known about danionine morphology and its utility in the systematics of the group. The osteological
aspects of the gill arches in 32 species of the subfamily Danioninae, representing 21 valid genera, have
been comparatively studied. Serving as outgroup taxa, five species of four non-danionine subfamilies
were also examined. The danionine gill arches is shown to constitute a remarkably high structural
diversity, as demonstrated by 16 variable characters, eleven of which are described herein for the first
time. Based on outgroup comparison, Danioninae is uniquely diagnosed by the presence of a
cartilaginous fifth epibranchial with a ventral tip articulating only with the posteroventral edge of the fourth
epibranchial. In contrast, the cartilaginous fifth epibranchial in all the outgroup taxa is ventrally associated
not only with the fourth epibranchial, but also with the cartilaginous dorsal tip of the fourth ceratobranchial.
Given the presence of such a danionine epibranchial articulation in Sundadanio , this enigmatic-yet-
problematic genus is here classified in Danioninae, regardless of the conflicting and poorly-resolved
topologies of the molecular trees of previous studies. The rasborin process sensu Liao et al. (2010) is
confirmed as a synapomorphy that supports the monophyly of the tribe Rasborini. In addition,
incorporation of the genera Amblypharyngodon and Pectenocypris within Rasborini according to
previous molecular studies is corroborated by the presence of the rasborin process in both taxa, which is
reported herein for the first time. Several novel osteological structures in the gill arches unique to other
danionine taxa were also discovered, particularly in the genera that exhibit highly-evolved modifications of
feeding behavior, such as Amblypharyngodon , Esomus , Pectenocypris , and Raiamas .



Lyons, Kady (California State University Long Beach); Carlisle, Aaron (Hopkins Marine Station, Pacific
Grove, CA, United States); Blasius, Mary (California State University Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States); Mull, Christopher (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Winkler, Chuck
(Southern California Marine Institute, Terminal Island, CA, United States); O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay
Aquarium, Monterey, CA, United States); Lowe, Christopher (California State University Long Beach,
Long Beach, CA, United States)

Levels of Organic Contaminants and Mercury in Four Species of YOY Lamnid Sharks

During reproduction, females have the ability to transfer accumulated contaminants to offspring by a
process called maternal offloading. Since organic contaminants are biomagnified through the food web, a
mother‘s the trophic level should highly influence the magnitude and composition of contaminants passed
to developing young. Liver contaminant concentrations were measured in four species of young of the
year (YOY) lamnid sharks caught in southern and central California to compare the degree of maternal
contaminant transfer from females with varying diets. YOY white sharks (n=19) had the highest levels of
organochlorine contaminants among all four groups (∑PCBs 14 ± 10 µg/g ww [wet weight], ∑DDTs 75 ±
87 µg/g ww), followed by mako sharks (n=4; ∑PCBs 7 ± 7 µg/g ww, ∑DDTs 13 ± 75 µg/g ww), thresher
(n=1; ∑PCBs 2.8 µg/g ww, ∑DDTs 5.7 µg/g ww) and salmon sharks (n=17; ∑PCBs 0.6 ± 0.5 µg/g ww,