associated, bony fish found off the coast of California, with populations concentrated south of Point
Conception. Commercial landings peaked in 1932 in the United States and then steadily declined.
Mexican landings remained high until 1964, when commercial landings fell below 200,000 pounds. Giant
sea bass stocks have been depleted to the point that a moratorium from fishing was declared in 1982.
Although they are restricted from being targeted, commercial vessels may legally retain giant sea bass as
incidental catch. Following the severe decline in the abundance of S. gigas, we predict the current gene
frequencies will reflect a loss in genetic variability in the remaining population.

S. gigas currently resides in the family Polyprionidae, due to shared morphological characteristics with
wreckfishes. Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA are being sequenced to provide a molecular foundation to
its most recent taxonomic placement. Samples were collected from the Natural History Museum of Los
Angeles, Scripps Oceanographic Institute and through collaborative efforts with local fish landings.
Determining an accurate phylogeny of S. gigas and its allied taxa will not only clarify the evolution of a top
carnivore but will also inform us as to the genetic impact of overexploitation and allow for the predicted
response of potential pressures.




                                                                                                          291
Hawkes, Virgil (LGL Limited); Gregory, Patrick (University of Victoria, Canada)

Temporal changes in the relative abundance of amphibians relative to riparian buffer width in
western Washington, USA

In certain regions of Canada and the United States, amphibians have been shown to be sensitive to
forest management and the short-term adverse effects of timber harvesting on terrestrial amphibians
have been well documented in the literature. However, the effects of silvicultural treatments on
amphibians may not be realized until many years after treatment. Manipulative forest management
experiments with pre- and post-treatment data, random assignment of replicates to treatments, and
analyses over a large spatial scale are rare in the literature. Furthermore, even studies with pre- and post-
treatment data can be affected by ecological time lags; the longevity of some species may mean that it
could take several years to observe a treatment effect.

Riparian areas in forested landscapes of the Pacific Northwest have been recognized for high species
richness of amphibians yet little is known about the persistence of amphibians in mature forest fragments
such as unharvested riparian buffers surrounded by clearcuts. Our study investigated the efficacy, 2 and
10 years post-logging, of two different riparian management zone prescriptions established around third-
and fourth-order streams in western Washington to mitigate the effects of upland timber harvest on
amphibians.       Our findings suggest that there is no global response by terrestrial amphibians to logging
or to the retention of riparian management zones. Rather, species showed individual responses that
varied over time and between treatments and transects. Specifically Coastal Tailed Frogs ( Ascaphus
truei ) declined in clearcut upland habitats 2- and 10-years following logging while Western Red-backed
Salamander ( Plethodon vehiculum ) and Ensatina ( Ensatina eschscholtzii ) appear to benefit from the
recommended riparian management zone width. The influence of site effects was evident for some
species, whereas for others there is some suggestion of treatment effects, but the analyses were
confounded by patterns of natural population change at both local and regional scales, which were
evident two years following logging. Our results exemplify the need for longer-term studies to ensure that
potentially confounding factors, such as natural population fluctuation, are considered when interpreting
the results of time series data.



Hawlitschek, Oliver (Zoologische Staatssammlung); Rösner, René; Guggenbichler, Daniel; Glaw, Frank
(Zoologische Staatssammlung, Canada)

SmartHerper Comoros, a free field guide to the herpetofauna of the Comoro archipelago as a
mobile application.

We present SmartHerper Comoros, a free field guide to the reptiles and amphibians of the Comoros as a
mobile application for smartphones. SmartHerper Comoros fulfills every function of a traditional printed
field guide. It includes an introduction to the Comoran environment and herpetofauna, an interactive key,
and species accounts. The species accounts include text information, a photograph gallery, sounds of
frog calls, and a map with localities that can be viewed in a GoogleMaps window and are available for
navigation via the GPS function of the smartphone. An interactive glossary provides explanations of
specific terminology in popup windows. Weblinks connect to the related Reptile Database, AmphibiaWeb
and IUCN Red List entries via the browser of the smartphone. The app enables users to contribute
photographs and locality data of the species included. This data is directly uploaded to the database for
inspection by the administrator and will be made available to the user community in regular updates. The
app is freely available for download at the website of the Zoologische Staatssammlung München
(http://www.zsm.mwn.de/). It was programmed using Java and is currently available for the Android



                                                                                                         292
operating system. We chose Android because all software necessary for the development is open-
source, and because many smartphones use this operating system. The development of versions runnig
on iOS and Microsoft Windows Mobile is planned. The application targets scientists working in
biodiversity research, taxonomy, ecology, and conservation planning, as well as non-professional
naturalists visiting or resident of the focus region. In addition to the current English version, editions in
other languages are planned. Since SmartHerper Comoros and planned future SmartHerpers are free,
easily available and easy to use, we hope that they will contribute to the dissemination and generation of
knowledge on biodiversity of their focus regions and thus stimulate interest in the observation and
conservation of regional biodiversity in visitors, e.g., ecotourists, and residents alike. The structure of
SmartHerper allows for easy modification to create field guides of other organism groups and regions.



Hayes, Marc P (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife); McIntrye, Aimee P (Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Jones, Jay E (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada); Lund, Eric M
(Washington Department of FIsh and Wildlife, Canada); Waterstrat, Frithioff T (The Evergreen State
College, Canada); Giovanini, Jack N; Duke, Steven D (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada); Quinn, Timothy
(Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Kroll, Andrew J (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada)

Evaluating N-mixture abundance estimators for unmarked individuals of cryptic taxa

Sentinel taxa are used as indicator species due to their perceived sensitivity to environmental change.
Estimates of population size based on count data uncorrected for spatial and temporal variation in
detection probability can lead to erroneous conclusions about impacts from environmental or
anthropogenic disturbances.        Traditional tools for estimating population size, such as mark-recapture
estimators, may be impractical for sentinel taxa, many of which are cryptic and occur at low population
densities. We used simulated and empirical data and a binomial mixture model for unmarked individuals
to estimate detection probabilities and abundance for two amphibian genera, giant Dicamptodon and
torrent Rhyacotriton salamanders.          In our simulation, we assessed model sensitivity to changes in
animal density (5 and 15), number of plots (50 – 150), detection probabilities (0.05 – 0.5), and number of
sampling visits (2 – 4). We evaluated the effects of stream temperature and stream order on detection
probability using field data collected from forested streams in Washington, USA.

Simulation results indicated that precision of detection probability estimates improved as the number of
sites and sampling occasions increased. Variability of estimated population sizes decreased with higher
detection probability, although species abundance had little effect on the precision of detection probability
estimates.Results from empirical field data indicated that detection probability estimates ranged from
0.07-0.65 for giant salamanders and 0.06-0.67 for torrent salamanders. Giant salamander detection
probability was positively associated with stream temperature regardless of stream order, and was higher
in second- and third- order streams than first-order streams. Detection probability for torrent salamanders
varied with stream temperature, order, and the interaction of those covariates, with detection increasing
with temperature for second- and third-order streams but showing a flat or decreasing trend for first-order
streams. Taken together, our results indicate that the use of binomial mixture models for unmarked
individuals is a feasible alternative to traditional mark-recapture techniques for estimating detection
probability and abundance for taxa that are cryptic or occur at low densities. These models, paired with
careful consideration of study design alternatives, can provide researchers with robust estimates of
important quantities and obviate the traditional reliance on ad hoc indices of relative abundance for many
rare and sensitive taxa.




                                                                                                         293
Hayes, Marc P (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife); Abrahamse, Allison E (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Anderson, Marko J (Cedar Creek Corrections Center, Canada); Aubrey, Dennis
A; Bush, Kelli M B (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada); Cole, Douglas O (Cedar Creek Corrections
Center, Canada); Clouse, David C (Joint Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Ellis, David E (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Goodrowe Beck, Karen (Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, Canada); Hallock,
Lisa A (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Hash, Steven W (Oregon Zoo, Canada);
Hicks, Tiffany L (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Konecny, Lelani J (Woodland
Park Zoo, Canada); LeRoy, Carri J (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada); Lynch, James J (Joint
Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Tidwell, Kyle S (Oregon Zoo, Canada); Martin, Andrea S (Sustainability
in Prisons Project, Canada); McAllister, Kelly A (Washington Department of Transportation, Canada);
Meadows, David S; Milner, Jacklyn A (Northwest Trek Wildlife Park, Canada); Mukobi, Asaba C (Oregon
Zoo, Canada); Mullett, Tina M (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Nadkarni, Nalini M (University of Utah,
Canada); Neitman, Keith E (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Pacholke, Dan J (Washington State
Department of Corrections, Canada); Pramuk, Jennifer B. (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Richardson,
John F (Joint Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Ridgway, Ryan A; Rojas, Christina M (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Sartor, Richard L (Phoenix Zoo, Canada); Schmidt, Tamara A (Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Shepherdson, David J (Oregon Zoo, Canada); Stewart, Karen
L (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Tirhi, Michelle J (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada);
Weber, Sarah R (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada)

The Successful Translocation Trajectory of Oregon Spotted Frogs (Rana pretiosa) on Joint Base
Lewis McChord: A Remarkable Partnership of Prisons, Zoos, Students and Scientists

The Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF - Rana pretiosa ), an at-risk endemic to the Pacific Northwest, is the
focus of recovery efforts over its geographic range. One such effort is a pilot translocation the Washington
(State) OSF Working Group initiated in 2008. The Group includes a coterie of stakeholders dedicated to
conservation assembled to address OSF recovery in Washington State in 2007. In this effort, the
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) leads; four partners (Northwest Trek, Oregon Zoo
[OZ], Sustainable Prisons Project [SPP – an Evergreen State College-based collaboration with the
Department of Corrections that involves the Cedar Creek Corrections Center], and Woodland Park Zoo
[WPZ]) rear frogs; the Fish and Wildlife Program at Joint Base Lewis McChord (JBLM) manages the
recipient site; Port Blakely Tree Farms, WDFW, and the US Fish and Wildlife Service manage donor sites
and provide logistic support; and with all partners, the Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, the Nature
Conservancy, and the Washington Department of Transportation help advise.

In 2007, the Working Group viewed engaging in a pilot translocation as prudent because such efforts,
often problematic, had never been tried with OSF. We first evaluated potential recipient sites for habitat
suitability, exotic predators and disease. After initial site screening and applying this evaluation more
thoroughly to the three top choices, we chose Dailman Lake on JBLM. We weighed the tradeoff between
releasing mortality-prone early life stages and predator experience-limited later life stages, opting to
release post-metamorphic frogs grown to the largest possible size prior to a release date safely in
advance of overwintering. We chose two donor sites based on advice that founders should be both locally
adapted and diverse, and that genetic mixing was not the problem historically believed. Our locally
adapted choice was the Black River population complex in Thurston County; the diverse choice was the
Conboy Lake population in Klickitat County.

Northwest Trek and OZ began rearing frogs in 2008, and SPP and WPZ added to that effort in 2009.
Each year, eggs obtained in Feb-Mar from donor sites were reared through metamorphosis up to the
release size in Sept-Oct. Survival among institutions and years has been variable, averaging about 50%
(0-84%). Frogs released annually have increased from ca. 500 the first year to >1,200 in 2010 -11. Size
of released frogs also varies, in part because SPP can consistently rear frogs to adult size each year, a
situation not possible at other institutions due to less time available for husbandry. In 2011, we recorded



                                                                                                        294
the first in situ reproduction. The 2012 season is the five-year mark, the point at which the Working
Group will decide whether translocation to this site should continue. Our presentation will include lessons
learned on site evaluation, rearing, anti-predator behavior and discuss the future.



Hayes, Tyrone (Univ. California);

“The” Cause of Amphibian Decline

As much as 70% of all amphibians globally are in decline. Numerous causes have been proposed for
explaining amphibian declines including emergent diseases, habitat loss, invasive species, climate
change and chemical contaminants. My laboratory‘s work has focused on the role of chemical
contaminants, especially endocrine disrupting chemicals in the environment. To date, our largest
research efforts have focused on the herbicide atrazine which demasculinizes and feminizes males, and
also inhibits immune function. In addition, these effects have been documented in all vertebrate classes
and are also correlated with compromised reproductive health in humans. We propose that atrazine and
other environmental chemical contaminants interacts with other factors and are a major culprit in
amphibian declines.



Hazard, Lisa (Montclair State University);

Do ecological factors drive physiological control of a unique ion-secreting tissue, the lizard salt
gland?

Salt glands are used by an ecologically diverse range of lizard species to excrete excess dietary salts; the
salts secreted vary with diet. I am investigating whether the physiological mechanisms controlling ion
secretion by lizard salt glands are similar across taxa (indicating phylogenetic constraint on physiology) or
vary according to diet (indicating diet-related natural selection on the regulatory mechanism), using a
comparative approach toevaluate species that have evolved nasal salt glands independently but use
them under similar ecological circumstances. Specifically, I predicted that secretion would be initiated by
potassium in herbivorous species (due to the high potassium content of plants), by sodium or general
osmotic loads in marine species (due to the high and constant sodium chloride content of marine diets),
and by chloride in water-limited species regardless of diet (because unlike the cations, chloride cannot be
coupled with insoluble urate). Thus far, data on four lizard species (two herbivores and two insectivores)
provide support for this idea. Responses of salt glands to different combinations of cations (sodium,
potassium, and histidine control) and anions (chloride and acetate control) were assessed. Lizards were
given ion treatment or controls (saline and sham injected) daily for 4 days; secreted salt was collected
and analyzed for sodium, potassium, and chloride content. The herbivorous desert iguana (Dipsosaurus
dorsalis, Iguanidae) secreted only in response to potassium and/or chloride loads, not sodium or other
osmotic loads. The ecologically similar but distantly related Uromastyx dispar (Agamidae) required the
presence of both potassium and chloride to achieve high rates of secretion. The insectivorous green
anole (Anolis carolinensis, Polychrotidae) and Schneider‘s skink (Eumeces schneideri, Scincidae)
secreted only in response to chloride, regardless of the accompanying cation, though the skink secreted
at lower rates when sodium was present. Dietary factors initiating secretion were those most ecologically
relevant to each species, suggesting that lizard salt glands show evolutionary flexibility in response to
ecological pressures. The combination of simplicity and variability of secretion, coupled with interspecific
variation in an environmental stressor, dietary salinity, makes lizard salt glands ideal models for the study
of the evolution of osmoregulatory systems in vertebrates.



                                                                                                         295
Hazard, Lisa (Montclair State University); Kwasek, Kristen; Koelmel, Erika; Gonzalez-Abreu, Madelyn;
Gerges, Sherif (Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ, United States)

Variation in salinity aversion of temperate forest amphibian species may influence response to
anthropogenic salinization

Evolutionary theory predicts that there should be a link between the physiological tolerance of an animal
for an environmental stressor and the behavioral tolerance for that stressor; animals should seek to avoid
stressful environments. However, if animals have no prior exposure to a stressor (and thus no selection
pressure to evolve avoidance behaviors), sudden environmental shifts may result in a mismatch between
physiological and behavioral tolerances. Global climate change may lead to increased salinization of
freshwater habitats through local changes in winter snowfall (and therefore application of road de-icers),
as well as increased seawater incursions into freshwater habitats. Salts may contaminate local
watersheds to levels high enough to potentially impact amphibian populations. Selection of inappropriate
breeding and oviposition sites by adults could greatly decrease egg and larval survival, since larval
amphibians are often sensitive to even modest salinity increases. We tested adults of several amphibian
species from the northeastern United States (wood frogs, Lithobates sylvaticus; green frogs, Lithobates
clamitans; bullfrogs, Lithobates catesbeianus; northern leopard frogs, Lithobates pipiens; spotted
salamanders, Ambystoma maculatum; eastern newts, Notophthalmus viridescens) to determine whether
they showed behavioral aversion to increased salinity, and if so, at what threshold concentration. Animals
were individually placed in a two-compartment test chamber containing aged tap water on one side and
salt solutions ranging from 0 to 500 mM (approximately equivalent to sea water) on the other side.
Location and behaviors were recorded during a 10-minute trial. Species differences in threshold aversion
concentrations were observed; some species (e.g. spotted salamanders) showed strong aversion to even
low concentrations while others (wood frogs) showed no aversion to salinities as high as sea water.
Species with higher behavioral thresholds may attempt to breed in habitats unsuitable for successful egg
and larval development. Tests of adult physiological tolerance are underway. These results will help
predict current and future impacts of increased habitat salinity on amphibian communities.



Hazin, Fabio (UFRPE); Afonso, Andre (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil); Cerqueira Ferreira, Lucianna (Canada)

Shark Monitoring Program off Recife, Brazil

Shark attacks on humans have prompted the implementation of shark control programs aiming at
reducing local populations of dangerous species using gillnets. However, shark meshing inflicts severe
mortality to both target and harmless species and produces significant ecological disturbances. A different
methodological approach to mitigate shark peril off Recife, Brazil, combines bottom longline gear and
drumline gear equipped with circle hooks with great efficiency. Four longline sets have been
systematically conducted at two fishing sites on a weekly basis. Longlines are deployed at about 1.5-3 km
from shore, while 23 drumlines are deployed at about 0.5-1 km from shore. This spatial arrangement
aimed at intercepting approaching sharks before they enter into the area of peril by imposing two "shields"
with decreasing fishing effort shorewardly. Following the capture of a potentially aggressive shark, the
animal is hauled into the vessel, accommodated in a wet tank assembled on the deck, and then
transported towards the continental slope for tagging and release. A total of 1,121 individuals were caught
in 280,079 baited hooks deployed between May 2004 and December 2011. The catch composition
evidenced high selectivity for sharks and comprised fish species and a few turtles only. Eight potentially
aggressive sharks were caught, corresponding to large carcharhinids and sphyrnids. Tiger, bull, and
blacktip sharks exhibited higher catch rates in decreasing order and are believed to be responsible for
most of the attacks. The global fishing mortality was reasonably low (about 20%) and protected species



                                                                                                       296
such as goliath groupers, nurse sharks, and turtles showed ~100% survival. The littoral of Recife
accounts for 55 confirmed shark attack incidents corresponding to 20 fatalities since 1992. Yet, since the
creation of the shark monitoring program of Recife, the shark attack rate diminished about 97% while
fishing operations were being conducted (W = 1108.5, P < 0.001), with >90% of the attacks occurring
when the program was paused for funding renewal. Overall, the shark monitoring program of Recife
produced little impacts on caught species and raised essential information for the management of shark p



Healas, Sara (Central Washington University); Irwin, Dr. Jason (Central Washington University, Canada)

Geographic variation of freeze tolerance in the Pacific Chorus frog, Pseudacris regilla

Pacific Chorus frogs have the ability to survive extensive tissue freezing during the winter months.
Survival of freezing requires that the frogs produce massive amounts of cryoprotective glucose and
glycerol from stored liver glycogen. We hypothesized that where winters are longer and/or colder, frogs
will produce more cryoprotectants and, therefore, store more liver glycogen. We collected frogs in the
spring from coastal (Seattle area), inland (central Washington State) and high elevation (Cascade
Mountains) sites and housed them outside until the fall when they had naturally developed their cold
tolerance. In early November, the frogs were moved inside to an incubator set at 2°C. In January and
early February the frogs were frozen in a cooling bath down to -2.5°C. Once frozen, the frogs were
dissected and liver and thigh were removed and frozen at -80°C. We used a colorimetric assay to
measure glucose and glycogen concentrations. Glucose significantly increased with freezing in both
inland and high-elevation frogs (F = 28.64, p < 0.001; data for coastal frogs pending). The amount of
glucose produced upon freezing was not significantly different between these two populations, but the
high-elevation frogs had 14% more glycogen stored in their livers (t= 2.34, p = 0.05). These data will then
be compared to inland populations.



Healey, Michael (University of British Columbia);

The Potential for Adaptation to Climate Change in Pacific Salmon

Rapid climate change will have a broad range of effects on the ecology and developmental biology of
Pacific salmon species throughout their range. Pacific salmon have shown considerable capacity to adapt
and even to thrive in the face of environmental change, including the dramatic changes in climate that
occurred through recent glacial periods. It remains an open question, however, how well salmon can
adapt to the present day rapid changes in climate resulting from human technology. In this paper I will
focus primarily on the likely effects of climate warming on life stage transitions and the feeding ecology of
salmon. Pacific salmon may be considered transient species in all the major habitats that they occupy.
Their transitions between life stages and habitats are timed to take advantage of favourable conditions for
growth and survival in each of the successive habitats they occupy. Movements within habitats are
designed and timed to ensure that the salmon are properly positioned to make the transition to their next
habitat. Within habitats, salmon appear to take advantage of particular food web dynamics to maximize
growth and survival. Recent studies have revealed changes in the timing of life stage and habitat
transitions that appear maladaptive. Other studies have shown that the food web structure and dynamics
of freshwater and marine habitats are changing in ways that are unfavourable to salmon. The capacity of
salmon to adapt rapidly both phenotypically and genotypically should modulate the effects of rapid climate
change in the near term. Over the medium to long term, however, the prognosis is not good for salmon




                                                                                                         297
populations in the southern parts of their range and some consequences of rapid climate change, like
ocean acidification, will adversely affect anadromous salmon throughout their range.



Hecnar, Darlene (Lakehead University); Brazeau, Daniel (Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, ON,
Canada); Auger, Brett; Hecnar, Stephen (Lakehead University, Canada); Casper, Gary (Great Lakes
Ecological Services, Canada)

Filling in the Blanks: The Distribution of Northern Ontario¿s Herpetofauna and the Wallacean
Shortfall

As biodiversity continues to decline, conservationists face two fundamental problems. First, species are
going extinct faster than we can discover them ¾ the Linnean Shortfall. Second, species and their
populations are going extinct before we can even map their distributions ¾ the Wallacean Shortfall. This
second problem in turn creates a fundamental dilemma for resource managers ¾ how can you conserve
what you don‘t know you have? This is one of the most important problems facing government and non-
governmental organizations having mandates to manage, protect or conserve biodiversity. Although both
Canadian and United States national parks now have certified lists of species for their properties, most
provincial and state natural resource agencies or protected areas lack this basic information. Atlas
projects exist in several states and provinces but meagre support results in incomplete distribution maps.
Locality records are especially sparse for the northern portions of Canadian provinces resulting in poorly
defined distribution patterns and northern range limits for many species. Northern Ontario is largely
unexplored for its herpetofaunal diversity because of its extensive and rugged wilderness, lack of access,
and lack of basic searches. As part of our efforts to promoting development of a Binational Lake Superior
Herpetofaunal Monitoring Program we surveyed over 100 locations in the northeastern basin of Lake
Superior where gap analysis indicated a paucity of records for both amphibians and reptiles. We used
visual encounter surveys, frog call surveys, aquatic funnel trapping, and baited hoop traps for turtles to
determine if the apparent ‗herpetofaunal gap‘ on the northeastern shore is real or simply an artifact of
insufficient sampling. We spent 43 person/days in the field and detected 9 species at numerous locations
between Marathon and Wawa.          Most of our observations represent new locality records. Other novel
finds include detection of western-midland intergrade painted turtles as far north as White River. Our
efforts in one year cover little of the area, but suggest that the gap is at least partially a product of
insufficient sampling and highlights the need for agencies responsible for managing natural resources to
conduct or sponsor basic species inventories.



Hecnar, Stephen (Lakehead University);

Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Amphibians: From Populations and Metapopulations to
Metacommunities

Considerable progress has been made since alarms were sounded about global amphibian declines over
two decades ago. We now better understand the magnitude of decline and some of its causes. Advances
in ecology provide us with a better appreciation of the importance of scale in determining status of
amphibians. However, serious gaps of knowledge still exist that hamper our efforts to understand the
spatial and temporal dynamics of amphibian populations and communities and to accurately assess
species status. Abundance is inherently variable in populations making trend detection difficult, but
presence-absence studies can reveal the underlying dynamics and spatial structure of populations at
larger scales. Application of the metapopulation concept to amphibians has been questioned, or its



                                                                                                      298
usefulness remains untested. I used intensive surveys to examine the dynamics of 13 species at 39 sites
over 20 years in Southern Ontario. Site characteristics and stochastic events influence species turnover,
but asynchrony among sites at larger scales buffers trends in incidence as theory predicts. However, 20
years of study reveals subtle but significant trends in incidence. Overall, species richness is slowly
increasing with 4 species declining, 3 increasing and 3 showing no trend in incidence. My results and
those of others demonstrate the efficacy of using metapopulation approaches to describe amphibian
spatial and temporal dynamics. Although few long-term studies exist, sufficient evidence indicates that a
broad definition of the metapopulation incorporating a variety of spatial structures describes how
amphibian populations function at landscape and regional scales. Likewise, because species interact, the
more recent application of the metacommunity concept to amphibian faunas provides an appropriate and
useful framework for studying regional amphibian dynamics. Metacommunity paradigms such as
metapopulation, mass-effect, and filtering appear to successfully categorize amphibian dynamics. Despite
our conceptual advances, numerous gaps of knowledge remain for most species (dispersal, natural
history, distribution). Long-term large-scale studies remain rare and existing monitoring programs lack
sufficient power to discern trends.



Hedges, S. Blair (Pennsylvania State University); Conn, Caitlin (Pennsylvania State University, Canada)

A new skink fauna from Caribbean islands

About 600 species of squamate reptiles are endemic to Caribbean islands. Among the largest radiations
of lizards are the anoles, sphaeros, ameivas, galliwasps, rock iguanas, and leios. Until recently, skinks
have been a minor component, with only six species recognized in the region. Our initial molecular
phylogenetic results indicated a much greater diversity, which led us to a morphological revision of the
available material. We recognize 38 species of skinks endemic to Caribbean islands, including nine
resurrected names and 24 new names. We found that the higher-level taxonomy of skinks was in need of
restructuring to facilitate revisionary work. We recognize seven families of skinks, instead of one, and
place the New World species in the subfamily Mabuyinae of the family Mabuyidae. Within the Mabuyinae,
we recognize 16 genera instead of a single genus Mabuya . A molecular timetree shows that mabuines
dispersed from Africa to South America in the Miocene (~18 million years ago). The Caribbean islands
were colonized by skinks from South America, floating on flotsam, at least six times in the last 10 million
years, each time leading to a different genus. The largest of those genera is Spondylurus , with 17
species distributed mostly in the northern Caribbean. Sympatric species of Caribbean skinks usually differ
in body size, and we recognize several ecomorphs based on associations of ecology and morphology. All
of the 38 endemic Caribbean island species are threatened with extinction and most (27 species) are
Critically Endangered. Sixteen of the Critically Endangered species are extinct, or possibly extinct,
because of human activities during the last two centuries. Surviving species are in need of immediate
protection. Analysis of collection records indicates that the decline or loss of 14 skink species can be
attributed to predation by the Small Indian Mongoose. That invasive predator was introduced as a
biological control of rats in sugar cane fields in the late nineteenth century (1872–1900), immediately
resulting in a mass extinction of skinks and other reptiles. The ground-dwelling and diurnal habits of
skinks have made them particularly susceptible to mongoose predation.




                                                                                                       299
Hedges, S. Blair (Pennsylvania State University);

CaribHerp: Caribbean Herpetology online

With color images and distribution maps, caribherp.org functions as a checklist and quick identification
guide to the ~800 species of amphibians and reptiles of the West Indies. Sounds and video are included,
when available. An initial list of species accounts is first generated by the user, for all species or only
those on one island, or those having a search term in their account. The list may be further sorted in
many different ways (taxonomy, common name, author, etc.). A new journal, Caribbean Herpetology ,
is integrated with the database. An online form may be used to submit short articles in the journal,
reporting new and significant information on distribution, behavior, and other categories. After review and
acceptance, these articles are published online and the information is integrated with the database.
Photos, video, and sounds (frog calls) may accompany article submissions. As the journal develops,
longer articles will be published. Two other related Caribbean web resources have been released as well:
caribmap.org and caribnature.org . CaribMap is a resource for exploring historical map images of the
Caribbean, now numbering more than 800 maps dating back to the early 1500s. Map images are fully
sortable and searchable. Each map is scanned at high resolution so that small toponyms may be
resolved. CaribNature is a conservation site that presents multimedia essays on the natural history of the
islands and difficulties facing the biodiversity, starting with Haiti. The mediography is mostly from the work
of professional videographers and photographers. The site is available in English, Spanish, and French.



Heinicke, Matthew (Villanova University); Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX,
United States); Jackman, Todd; Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United States)

Evolutionary history of Southeast Asian gliding geckos: phylogenetic, geographic, and temporal
patterns.

Gliding morphologies appear in diverse vertebrate lineages, including in the gecko genera Hemidactylus
(Cosymbotus), Luperosaurus , and Ptychozoon . Species in each of these genera are arboreal rainforest
dwellers exhibiting dorsoventral flattening of bodies, interdigital webbing, lateral skin flaps, and flattened
tails with lateral projections. It has been hypothesized that the repeated development of gliding in Asian
rainforest vertebrates, including these geckos, is related to the dominance of tropical Asian tree floras by
dipterocarps. For dipterocarps to have influenced the evolution of gliding in Southeast Asian geckos,
gliding geckos must have Eocene or later origins. However, many gecko genera are known or thought to
be older. We performed phylogenetic and molecular clock analyses incorporating exemplars of
Cosymbotus , Luperosaurus , and Ptychozoon plus putative relatives to investigate the evolutionary
relationships, timing of origin, and biogeographic patterns. Sampled Luperosaurus and Ptychozoon are
not closely related; they are phylogenetically nested within Lepidodactylus and Gekko , respectively.
The divergences of Luperosaurus , Ptychozoon , and Cosymbotus from their closest relatives occurred
during the time period when dipterocarps came to dominate Asian tropical forests. Further, development
of gliding morphologies quickly followed colonization of Southeast Asia from other geographic areas by
the ancestors of Cosymbotus and Luperosaurus. These results therefore support the viability of a
gliding/dipterocarp correlation, and underscore the importance of not assuming early origins for
morphologically aberrant reptiles.




                                                                                                          300
Heinz, Heather (San Diego State University); Reeder, Tod (San Diego State University, San Diego, CA,
United States)

A Species-level Tree of the Iguanian LIzards

Iguanian lizards comprise a diverse group of squamate reptiles (i.e., lizards and snakes) exhibiting great
morphological, ecological, and taxonomic diversity. They are well-studied in evolutionary research and
have been the focus of comparative studies on a wide variety of subjects, including adaptive radiations,
diversification rates, ecomorphology, and the evolution of viviparity, of herbivory, and of the mitochondrial
genome. Despite the dependence of such studies on phylogenetic information, many of the inter-familial
relationships of the Iguania are just now coming to light. This study presents the most taxonomically well-
sampled phylogenetic hypothesis of the Iguania to date. A supermatrix over 26,000 basepairs in length
was constructed by concatenating sequences of multiple mitochondrial genes with a recently published
29-gene nuclear dataset. Because mitochondrial gene sequences are available for manyfold more taxa
than nuclear gene sequences, taxonomic sampling is increased over the nuclear datset to more than 800
individuals. Despite high levels of missing data for most nuclear genes, overlapping sequence data from
multiple, shared mitochondrial genes form a well-sampled backbone that places taxa with little or no
nuclear data into families with high support and with largely congruent relationships to previous studies.
As with previous studies, iguanian lizards are split into two deeply divergent clades (i.e., the Old World
Acrodonts and the predominantly New World Pleurodonts), with most families well-resolved.
Relationships among families, particularly within the Pleurodont radiation, are less well-supported.
Despite the known, artificial grouping of ingroup agamids with outgroup snakes as a result of long-branch
attraction between rapidly-evolving mitochondrial DNA sequences, removing snakes from the
mitochondrial plus nuclear dataset had little significant impact on topology or support, suggesting that
nuclear gene signal is strong. This study reaffirms the ability of a ―backbone‖ approach of overlapping
sequence data to successfully overcome large proportions of missing data in supermatrices. The inferred
phylogeny is the most fully-populated to date, ready to be employed for the study of character evolution
and diversification rates in iguanian lizards.



Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University); Cindy, Bessey (Florida International University,
North Miami, United States); Burkholder, Derek (North Miami, North Miami, United States); Fourqurean,
James (Florida International University, North Miami, United States)

Do tiger sharks influence seagrass ecosystems through multiple indirect pathways?

The importance of large-bodied herbivores in structuring seagrass ecosystems in undisturbed seagrass
communities has begun to receive considerable attention. Less appreciated is the possibility that the
structuring role of these herbivores was driven by top-down impacts of large predators (e.g. sharks) that
also have undergone dramatic declines in many regions. The potential for large predators to modify the
spatiotemporal pattern and intensity of herbivory is further complicated by their broad diets and the
possibility that they might indirectly influence seagrass communities through multiple pathways that could
serve to amplify or attenuate the strength of top-down effects. We used the relatively pristine seagrass
ecosystem of Shark Bay, Western Australia as a model system for investigating top-down effects of
grazers and top predators in the absence of major anthropogenic impacts. Using a combination of nested
exclosures and seagrass transplant experiments, as well as surveys of habitat use and abundance of
tiger sharks (top predators), megagrazers (turtles, sea cows), piscivores, and mesograzers (teleosts) we
investigated potential shark-induced trophic cascades through multiple pathways. Both pathways appear
to have the potential to mediate indirect effects of tiger sharks on seagrasses and likely work in concert to
amplify top-down impacts. Combined with other studies showing the potential of grazers at high



                                                                                                         301
population densities to heavily impact seagrass beds, our results suggest that the loss of top predators
could have important consequences for the structure and stability of seagrass ecosystems.



Hekkala, Evon (Fordham University); Shirley, Matthew (University of Florida, Canada)

Cryptic Diversity in Nile Crocodiles supports prior taxonomic hypotheses and revised
conservation status

We have taken a total evidence approach involving phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear
markers as well as karyotype analysis of chromosome number and structure to assess the monophyletic
status of the Nile crocodile.      Samples were collected from throughout Africa, covering all major
bioregions. We also utilized specimens from museum collections, including mummified crocodiles from
the ancient Egyptian temples at Thebes and the Grottes de Samoun, to reconstruct the genetic profiles of
extirpated populations. Our analyses reveal a cryptic evolutionary lineage within the Nile crocodile that
elucidates the biogeographic history of the genus and clarifies long-standing arguments over the species‘
taxonomic identity and conservation status. An examination of crocodile mummy haplotypes indicates
that the cryptic lineage corresponds to an earlier description of C. suchus and suggests that both African
Crocodylus lineages historically inhabited the Nile River. Recent survey efforts indicate that C. suchus is
declining or extirpated throughout much of its distribution. Without proper recognition of this cryptic
species, current sustainable use-based management policies for the Nile crocodile may do more harm
than good.



Herman, Tom (Acadia University);

Dynamics on the edge: turtles, trials and tribulations

Despite their long evolutionary history and ability to survive past cataclysmic environmental change,
turtles today are at tremendous risk worldwide. As a group turtles are characterized by long generation
time, high adult survival, low but variable juvenile survival, high spatial discrimination and strong site
affinities for reproduction and/or overwintering/aestivation. Populations are vulnerable to slight shifts in
adult survival. Because of considerable time lags associated with extreme longevity and late maturation,
changes in vital rates may go unnoticed until it is too late; logistic and funding constraints further
confound our ability to detect these changes.

In Canada all turtle species exist at or near their northern range limits; coincidentally these species
ranges are largely congruent with areas of highest human population density and growth, greatest degree
of landscape degradation from agricultural, industrial and residential development, and transportation
networks associated with all of the above. Conventional wisdom holds that edge-of-range populations
tend to be small, fragmented and constrained in ability to disperse successfully. Although these
populations may support reduced genetic variation, they may be able to respond more rapidly to
environmental change than centre-of-range populations. Under present climate change scenarios, with
isotherms and ranges advancing northward, dispersers should be at selective advantage, and Canadian
populations should expand.

However, continuing fragmentation and degradation of habitats that accompany these changes in climate
will likely continue to compromise Canadian turtle populations. Existing data from nearly all Canadian




                                                                                                        302
turtle species point to significant declines in both absolute numbers and numbers of populations. In
addition, genetic structuring in some species, on fairly fine spatial scales, has recently been documented.

New analytical tools allow us to reconstruct population histories, source/sink dynamics and responses to
past environmental change; these may help to guide us in modeling and managing future population
dynamics.



Hernández Díaz, José Alfredo (Universidad de los Andes); Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los
Andes, Canada)

Beauty does not always denote danger: Aposematic syndrome in the polymorphic poison frog
Dendrobates auratus

Warning signals modify predators foraging behavior by promoting the association between bright colors,
smells or certain behaviors, and prey‘s unpalatability. This ecological strategy, named aposematism, is
better studied as a phenotypic syndrome because it involves several covarying traits. Among dendrobatid
frogs, aposematism hasindependently evolved in several lineages. They are highly polymorphic in their
coloration patterns both among and within species which renders them excellent study systems to
understand the evolutionary mechanisms underlying aposematism. Dendrobates auratus                     is a
dendrobatid species with an outstanding coloration polymorphism. In this study we aimed to test the
hypothesis that aposematic polymorphism among frogs from different localities could be related to
variation in the other traits defining the aposematic syndrome. We visited nine localities in Panama where
we collected 7-13 individuals and measured: color conspicuousness, body size, jumping performance,
diet specialization and toxicity. We sought for relationships between measured traits conducting
Pearson‘s correlations and linear regressions. We found geographic variation in frogs‘ conspicuousness,
body size and toxicity; but not in diet specialization or jumping performance. Body size was positively
correlated with conspicuousness among localities and all individuals but not within each locality. Jumping
performance was positively correlated with conspicuousness among all individuals and within each
locality, but not among localities. Toxicity was not correlated with conspicuousness, but when excluding
frogs from locality CP6 (10 times more toxic than frogs from other localities), we found a negative
correlation between conspicuousness and toxicity. According to our results, traits defining aposematic
syndrome at the intra-specific level do not follow the same correlations at the inter-specific comparisons.
This pattern could reflect initial steps of evolutionary divergence, with high toxicity arising in non
conspicuous animals, probably stimulating predator learning by a strong stimulus. However, it is still
necessary to test how effective this aposematic polymorphism is on protecting frogs from predation and
how the warning signals and toxicity influence predator learning. This knowledge could help us to
understand the outstanding polymorphism among and within species.



Hernandez, Sandra E (The University of Queensland); Sernia, Conrad (The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia); Reynoso, Victor H (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico City,
Mexico); Bradley, Adrian J (The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia)

Life lessons from an invasive species. the cane toad.

Geographical characteristics, and the species genetic variation, are important for surviving, establishing
and dispersing in the species, but the first strategy that a living organism employs in adapting to its
environment involves adjustment to the physiological and cellular responses that it already possesses. To




                                                                                                        303
know to what extent these responses differ in an invasive species, the general health, immune
competence and the endocrine status of male cane toads ( Rhinella marina ) from three locations (Mexico
(MX) [native], Queensland Australia (QL) [introduced and established], Western Australia (WA) [migration
front line]) were determined during the wet season. The major findings were that dispersing animals (WA),
had the lowest incidence of parasitism and the best body condition compared with the native populations
(MX), or with the introduced and established populations (QL). No differences were found between
populations in the levels of plasma free fatty acids (FFA), an indicator of available energy reserves. When
endocrine status was investigated, dispersing animals showed the lowest levels of testosterone and
lowest corticosterone levels. No differences in plasma corticosterone levels were found between
established (QL) and native populations (MX). Finally significant differences were found between
populations in variables related to immune competence. The animals from the dispersing population (WA)
had the best index of delayed hypersensitivity (DHI) after 24h, compared with the other two populations.
In conclusion dispersing animals are undergoing significant adjustments in endocrine and immune
function during adaptation but once they are established, no differences can be observed in endocrine
and immune variables when compared with those for native populations.



Hernández-Ríos, Alfonso (UNAM); Mendez de la Cruz, Fausto R. (Instituto de Biologia UNAM, Canada)

Thermal ecology of a Horned Lizard on highlands: Assessing global warming vulnerability.

The elevational specialization would account for the striking diversity of restricted endemic species in
temperate mountains areas at the tropics, which are isolated by expanses of warmer lowland habitat. It
has been suggested that, if global temperatures rise more than 2 - 3 °C in coming decades, high-
elevation specialists in the tropics could be among the most imperiled species on Earth. The Mexican
Short Horned Lizard ( Phrynosoma braconnieri ) it‘s a rare and Mexican endemic species that inhabits on
tropical mountains and desert scrubs, and is the southernmost viviparous species within the genus.
Therefore is particularly vulnerable species to global warming. During last year we search for individuals
of this species on the highlands of Sierra Juárez, Oaxaca, México. We evaluate the thermal ecology
aspects on three different seasons (rainy, post-rainy and dry season) following the protocol proposed by
Hertz et al. (1993). The results show that the habitat present low thermal quality, whereas the individuals
reach high efficiency and precision on thermoregulation during all studied seasons. We have observed a
relatively narrow activity daily period, apparently limited by the low environmental temperatures, this
period would increase in response to higher temperatures. These results suggest a high thermoregulation
capacity and a low vulnerability to global warming. Nevertheless, these species could face other threats in
the near future, like the constant habitat loss and the competition with other species that reach their
habitat on their move to more suitable areas. The desert scrub populations of this species could face a
different scenario under global warming; the temperatures on these places are about 4 °C higher than the
mobserved in temperate zones and the precipitation is lower, so thermic stress is higher and the risk of
extinction could increase in the future.



Hero, Jean-Marc (Environmental Futures Centre, Griffith University); Kindermann, Christina; Graham,
Clara; McCallum, Hamish; Narayan, Edward (Environmental Futures Centre, Griffith University, Canada)

Stress and disease at high elevation: implications for understanding resilience to climate change

Globally, enigmatic amphibian population declines have been concentrated at high elevations,
independent of latitude. Explanations have been linked to climate change and the pathogenic fungus



                                                                                                        304
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ), however the links between these two factors are poorly
understood. Climate change threatens amphibians restricted to mountain tops, as the cooler
environmental conditions at high elevation are optimal for the growth and development of mountain-top
endemic frog species, hence they are vulnerable to increasing temperatures. Cooler montane
environments are also optimal for the growth of the pathogenic fungus Bd. Here we present the first
physiological evidence suggesting 1) frogs with high intensity of Bd have higher baseline stress hormone
levels, and 2) frog populations at higher elevation have increased stress levels (elevated baseline
corticosterone levels in urine) compared to their lowland counterparts. Prevalence of Bd zoospores from
frog skin swabs was quantified using a real-time quantitative PCR technique. Individual male frogs that
were identified as positive for Bd infection had significantly higher baseline urinary corticosterone
concentrations in comparison to Bd negative male frogs. Baseline urinary corticosterone concentrations
were also significantly higher at high altitude sites (P<0.001). These results, suggest frogs at higher
elevation are stressed and hence more susceptible to the impacts of Bd than their lowland counterparts.
So which factor is responsible for the extinction of frogs at high elevation ? and, who came first - the
stress or the disease?



Herrel, Anthony (CNRS); Measey, John (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, Porth Elisabeth,
South Africa)

Does substrate usage constrain locomotor and feeding function in caecilians?

Although it is often assumed that the body and head morphology in caecilians has evolved in response to
their subterranean life style, surprisingly little is known about the functioning of the locomotor and feeding
system. Moreover, how and to what degree a subterranean life style and subsurface locomotion may
constrain the function and evolution of both functional systems remains unknown. Here we provide data
on the kinematics of underground feeding and locomotion using both X-ray and external video recordings.
Moreover, we present data on bite and burrowing forces of animals derived from populations with known
variation in substrate characteristics and prey availability. Our data show how both locomotion and
feeding are characterized by unique kinematic patterns that appear shaped by the constraints of a
subterranean life-style. Moreover, burrowing and bite forces vary considerably across species yet appear,
at first sight, unrelated to diet or substrate compactness. Whereas bite forces may evolve under selection
for intra-specific competition (e.g. male-male combat) in some species, the variation in burrowing forces
may only be the consequence of selection on related traits such as body length or diameter.



Herrel, Anthony (CNRS); James, Rob (Coventry University, Coventry, United Kingdom); Tallis, Jason
(Coventry University, Coventry, Canada); Measey, John (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, Port
Elizabeth, South Africa); Tolley, Krystal (SANBI, Cape Town, South Africa); Tadic, Zoran (University of
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia); Vanhooydonck, Bieke (University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium)

Performance trade-offs in lizards: are speed-endurance trade-offs driven by variation in muscle
physiology?

Phenotypic diversification has been suggested to be constrained by trade-offs in the development or
expression of phenotypic traits. Performance trade-offs are often thought of as imposing limits on
phenotypic divergence and occur when different and conflicting functional demands are imposed on the
same phenotypic trait. For example, in lacertid lizards, selection on burst locomotion capacity has been
shown to trade off with endurance capacity. Such a tradeoff could be caused by conflicting demands on




                                                                                                          305
the locomotor muscles to express either fast, or slow, muscle fiber types, yet this remains untested. Here
we provide physiological data for the knee extensor using work-loop experiments in ten species of lacertid
lizards. Additionally we measured sprint performance, acceleration, and endurance capacity for
locomotion on a horizontal substrate. Although our data demonstrate significant trade-offs between sprint
speed and endurance capacity at the organismal level, this is not reflected in a trade-off at the muscular
level. Indeed, no correlation between peak power output and the decrease in power output during fatigue
runs was observed. These data suggest that either trade-offs are caused by other muscles than the knee
extensor (e.g. swing phase muscles) or that trade-offs reside in the cardiovascular system rather than at
the level of the locomotor muscles.



Hertz, Andreas (Senckenberg Research Institute);

Composition and conservation status of amphibian assemblages in western Panama

In view of its relatively small size, Panama supports one of the most diverse amphibian faunas in the
world. On only a thirteenth of the territory of British Columbia more than 200 species of amphibians have
been detected so far. However, herpetological inventory is still far from being completed and even
baseline studies have not been realized in some parts of the country. While certain areas in central
Panama have been well studied for more than a century and are now among the best known tropical
habitats, the mountain ranges in the eastern and western portion are still largely unexplored.

In the years 2008- 2010, I conducted field surveys at different sites along an approximately 200 km long
and 15 to 20 km broad transect, covering the central mountain range of western Panama. In total, I
collected specimens of more than 80 amphibian species belonging to all three orders. For many of these I
achieved new distribution, ecology and natural history data. Additionally, I found rare amphibian species
that have not been seen for decades. At various sites within the transect presence of the amphibian
chytrid fungus (Bd) could be confirmed. In order to reveal actual diversity among the collected amphibian
specimens, an approach of combined methods consisting of morphometrics, molecular data and
bioacoustics has been applied, that led to several taxonomic novelties.

Highest amphibian species diversity within the transect occurred in large protected forested areas like
Parque Nacional Santa Fé and Parque Internacional La Amistad, which are situated at the eastern and
western extremities of the transect, respectively. Additional, I discovered high amphibian species diversity
in the Cerro Colorado region, which is part of the autonomous territory of the Ngöbe-Buglé, the largest
indigenous ethnic group in Central America. This is the more remarkable as the area is completely
unprotected and still only little investigated. It is probably the last considerable remainder of intact
mountain rain forest in this part of the central mountain system, called Serranía de Tabasará. The Cerro
Colorado area is threatened by large international mining projects and thus of major conservation
concern.



Heupel, Michelle (Australian Institute of Marine Science); Mapleston, Amos; Simpfendorfer, Colin
(Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Going over the wall: fate of stocked barramundi

Barramundi are known to use both marine and freshwater habitats. As a popular, commercially and
recreationally fished species multiple management actions are in place including temporal closures and
restocking programs. Stocking programs deposit fingerlings into freshwater impoundments including weirs
along the Ross River in north Queensland. Although the intention of stocking is to provide fish within the
weir system, during the wet season individuals are known to escape from weirs with flood waters. The
contribution these freshwater individuals make to the local population is unknown. Here we examined the



                                                                                                        306
presence and mortality of freshwater stocked and wild caught marine barramundi to examine the role
each plays in the local system. A total of 26 barramundi were collected from Aplins Weir on the Ross
River, fitted with acoustic transmitters and released down river of the weir structure. An additional 12
barramundi were caught at the mouth of the river, fitted with acoustic transmitters and released. Acoustic
monitoring was used to examine presence and mortality rates within the two groups using Kaplan-Meier
estimates. No natural mortality was observed in either sample but both populations were subject to fishing
mortality. Individuals captured at the river mouth had a mortality rate of 0.30 while individuals captured in
the river had a mortality rate of 0.36. Approximately 30% of all released individuals were removed by
fishers with removals almost exclusively by recreational fishers. Fishing pressure was heaviest within the
river with the first removal there occurring 3 weeks after release of individuals, while the first removal of a
marine individual was 40 weeks after release. These results suggest the recreational fishery targeting
river habitats directly benefits from barramundi river populations and stocked individuals.



Hews, Diana (Indiana State University); Abell Baniki, Allison (Indiana State University, Canada)

Acute stress and plasma concentrations of corticosterone and androgens in male and female
striped plateau lizards (Sceloporus virgatus)

Glucocorticoids play a variety of key roles in behavior. Glucocorticoids enhance energy mobilization
supporting increased behaviors associated with courtship (e.g., calling behavior) and with male-male
contests (e.g., territory patrolling, territorial display). Acute glucocorticoid elevation can be an adaptation
to short-term stressors, and can support anti-predator behaviors, and also learning and memory related to
novel stressors. Factors explaining species differences in stress reactivity are less well understood, and
need examination to better understand hormone- behavior relationships. Wingfield‘s breeding-season
hypothesis predicts that glucocorticoid responsiveness to acute stressors in populations or species with
short breeding seasons should be muted, compared to those with longer breeding seasons. The striped
plateau lizard ( Sceloporus virgatus , Phrynosomatidae) has a short breeding season in Arizona, and
females are single-clutching within each breeding season. We measured plasma corticosterone and
androgen levels (dihydrotestosterone and testosterone) following one of four stress handling treatments
(0, 10, 60, or 180 min in captivity) over a 10-day period in the peak of mating activity. Adults of both
sexes subjected to longer captivity durations had higher corticosterone (CORT), and females had higher
levels than males at all time points. Peak CORT elevation after handling stress in this single-clutching
species was of comparable magnitude to responses documented in field studies on related multi-
clutching lizard species (other Sceloporus species; other species in Urosaurus and Uta lizard genera).
Total androgens did not vary significantly with stress duration, in either sex. Combining treatments,
plasma androgens correlated positively with plasma CORT in females but not in males. Plasma CORT
and body-mass residuals were negatively correlated, suggesting males in poor body condition and
females not investing heavily in reproduction (e.g. follicle mass) had higher CORT responses to this acute
handling stressor.



Hibbitts, Toby (TCWC, Texas A&M University);

Microhabitat use of an extreme habitat specialist and the effect of habitat fragmentation

Habitat specialization presumably gives a species an advantage over competitors that are habitat
generalists. But specialization comes with costs, such as an inability to utilize habitats which the
specialist species is not adapted. These costs have become intensified with habitat alteration and



                                                                                                           307
degradation. The Dunes Sagebrush Lizard is a habitat specialist that lives in the Mescalero and
Monahans Sands of southeastern New Mexico and western Texas. Within this ecosystem it specifically
uses the shinnery oak dunes with open depressions called blowouts. Recent work has shown that the
species declines in areas where habitat has been fragmented by caliche roads and oil well pads. Here, I
quantified the available microhabitat across fragmented and unfragmented sites within a shinnery dunes
ecosystem in Andrews County, Texas where Dunes Sagebrush Lizards were present.                    Each
unfragmented study site was paired with a fragmented site (average well pad density of 50 per hectare
with connecting roads). Three pairs of fragmented and unfragmented sites were used. I determined the
microhabitat preferences of the lizard at unfragmented sites and compared the availability of those
microhabitats across both fragmented and unfragmented sites.



Hickerson, Cari-Ann (John Carroll University); Anthony, Carl (John Carroll University, Canada); Walton,
Mike (Cleveland State University, Canada); Meszaros, George (John Carroll University, Canada)

The regulatory role of Plethodon cinereus in a temperate forest detrital food web

Predators can play important regulatory roles in ecosystems by initiating trophic cascades, which occur
when predation causes changes in abundance, biomass, diversity, or ecological function across two or
more links within food webs. However, ecological theory suggests that predator effects should weaken
with high species diversity, and that multiple trophic channels should attenuate top-down effects. Yet
predators can exert significant influence within the detritus-based food web of the temperate forest-floor,
a system described as possessing characteristics that attenuate predator-mediated effects. Terrestrial
salamanders, Plethodon cinereus , can achieve remarkably high densities within temperate forests of
eastern North America, where they play an important role in regulating invertebrates and may mediate
rates of leaf litter decomposition. As part of a larger field study on the role of predators within the forest-
floor food web, we sought to assess the potential for salamander-mediated effects to cascade to bacteria
and fungi – the trophic level linking invertebrate microbe-detritivores to decomposition. Through a four-
year predator removal study, we explored how the manipulation of predator densities affected the
arthropod and microbial communities in replicated, open field plots. Treatments were established from
which either P. cinereus , centipedes, or all major predators were removed during repeated plot surveys.
We used Berlese extraction and counts from beneath artificial cover objects to sample leaf litter
arthropods. Phospholipid fatty acid analysis (PLFA) was used to quantify soil microbes and all of these
organisms were compared among treatments and control plots. Bacteria were significantly suppressed in
plots with the most salamanders (centipede removal plots), but diplopods, isopods, gastropods and
predatory mites increased. Full resolution of mechanism(s) responsible for our findings was beyond the
scope of this study. However, our results contribute importantly to a growing body of evidence indicating
that P. cinereus , which are constrained to spatially fixed microhabitats, can be strong regulators of guild
members and lower trophic levels. Our results also indicate the importance of top-down, predator
mediated, regulation of species composition in a forest-floor, detrital food web, a system that is commonly
thought to be regulated primarily though bottom-up effects.




                                                                                                           308
Higham, Timothy (University of California, Riverside); Russell, Anthony (University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB, Canada)

Controlled chaos? Behavior, physiology and energetics of the autotomized tail of gekkotans

Autotomy, the voluntary loss of an appendage in response to mechanical or visual stimulation, is of
widespread occurrence among vertebrates and invertebrates. The lizard tail, when released, exhibits
movement patterns that do not occur prior to detachment, indicating that behavior of the severed
appendage is functionally adapted to prevailing circumstances. Extensive research has demonstrated
that tail loss and the ensuing tail movement are important for distracting predators, presumably by
providing a visual stimulus, but little attention has been paid to what the tail actually does, and thus why
its movements may be effective. Here we examine tail function after autotomy in gekkotans, with
emphasis on the leopard gecko, and report on three-dimensional kinematics, in vivo muscle activity
patterns, histochemistry and functional morphology. We review what is known, add new data, and
broaden the comparative framework within the Gekkota, which can then be extended to all lizards that
have the ability to autotomize their tail.

Released tails exhibit vigorous, complex post–autotomic movements that range from rhythmic swinging to
explosive acrobatic maneuvers, this variation resulting from differential patterns of motor unit recruitment.
Such complex behaviors are likely the outcome of selection related to the appetitive behavior of particular
predators, although little is known of the details of predator response, especially in nature. Recruitment of
suites of muscle fibers (fast vs. slow twitch) appears to be implicated in the varying actions of the tail, as
deduced from investigation of electromyographic patterns and muscle histochemistry. The neural circuitry
remains unexplored. Examination of movement patterns allows insight into the energetics of the
autotomized tail. Documentation of variation in the frequency, amplitude and magnitude of movements
provides insights into the role of differing behavior patterns following release, and how tail behavior may
be related to the ecology and morphology of particular gekkotan taxa.

Recent work has provided a solid platform for investigating various phenomena associated with tail
behavior after release, and we indicate directions for future research, including the potential for
restoration in regenerated tails of the complex behavior manifested by the original; ontogenetic shifts in
the behavior of released tails; how caudal muscle functions under ischemic conditions; and how
movements of the released tail are controlled.



Hiler, Waylon (Missouri Valley College); Wheeler, Benjamin (University of Arkansas Community College
Batesville, Batesville, AR, United States); Trauth, Stanley (Arkansas State University, State University,
AR, United States); Irwin, Kelly (Arkansas Game and Fish Commission, Benton, AR, United States)

Decline of the Ozark Hellbender (Cryptobranchus alleganiensis bishopi) in Arkansas

The Ozark Hellbender, Cryptobranchus alleganiensis bishopi, is an obligate cool-water salamander that is
dependent upon stable benthic conditions. The range of hellbender populations within Arkansas is
essentially limited to the primary stems of two watersheds, the Eleven Point and Spring rivers. Although
both of these rivers are spring fed, rocky bottomed, rural rivers, they have different within-river habitat
characteristics and surrounding land use practices. Since the early 1980's the Ozark Hellbender has
undergone a decline throughout its entire range; however, the Spring River population has declined
almost to the point of extirpation, whereas the Eleven Point River population still shows signs of sporadic
recruitment. Both populations exhibit a proportional increase in the abundance of larger individuals and
an increase in the number and types of abnormalities; yet, anthropogenic perturbations appear to have



                                                                                                          309
had more of an impact on the Spring River population. These temporal changes in demography are
thought to be due, in part, to catastrophic flood events, legal and illegal collection pressures, land-use
practices, and recreational use of the rivers.



Hilton, Eric J. (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institue of Marine Science,
Canada); Paraschiv, Marian; Suciu, Radu (Danube Delta National Institute, Canada)

The skull and pectoral girdle and fin of the stellate sturgeon, Acipenser stellatus, with
comparisons to other sturgeons (Acipenseridae)

Extant members of the family Acipenseridae are currently classified in four genera: Scaphirhynchus
(North America), Pseudoscaphirhynchus (Aral Sea), Huso (Eurasia), and the widely-recognized
paraphyletic ― Acipenser ‖ (North America, Eurasia). Advances have been made in understanding the
systematic relationships among sturgeons based on both morphological and molecular data. One
significant advance relates to the position of          Pseudoscphirhynchus       relative to the genus
Scaphirhynchus . Historically, the two genera were widely regarded as being each other‘s closest
relatives (as Scaphirhynchinae or Scaphirhynchini in different classifications). Analysis of mitochondrial
DNA data, however, suggested that Pseudoscaphirhynchus is better regarded as nested within ―
Acipenser ‖, specifically as sister-group to the Stellate Sturgeon, A. stellatus , from the Black and
Caspian seas. Recent morphological analyses also recovered this relationship, supported by a number of
osteological synapomorphies (e.g., horizontal arm of the jugal undercuts the nasal capsule, absence of a
distinct median process of the jugal, spines on bones of the dermal skull roof, and branching of the trunk,
occipital, and supratemporal sensory canals), although these results were based on few and relatively
small individuals. In this presentation, we describe the anatomy of the skull and pectoral girdle of A.
stellatus based on newly prepared skeletal specimens of adult individuals, as well as examination of a
large number of preserved individuals representing a broad range of ontogenetic stages. We will present
new anatomical data from all regions of the skull (dermatocranium, neurocranium, jaws, and gill arches)
and pectoral girdle and offer interpretations of these and other characters. In particular, we will describe
the allometry of the snout in A. stellatus , which undergoes substantial elongation relative to other
sturgeons. Comparisons of both qualitative and quantitative data will be made to other members of the
family.



Hinderle, Danna (San Diego State University); Lewison, Rebecca (San Diego State University, San
Dieog, United States); Walde, Andrew (Andrew Walde, Atascadero, United States); Boarman, William
(Conservation Science Research & Consulting, Spring Valley, United States); Deutschman, Douglas (San
Diego State University, San Diego, United States)

Desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) and translocation: Homing, habitat, behavior and
temperature experiments

Translocation of threatened or vulnerable species is a tool increasingly used for conservation and
management. The behavioral and physiological responses to translocation may undermine the success of
translocation efforts in some species. For the federally protected desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii),
translocation is a strategy used to manage declining populations, yet post-translocation responses in this
species are poorly understood. Here, we radio-tracked 40 tortoises in Fall 2009 and 40 tortoises in Spring
2010 to explore homing ability and movement patterns. We also considered differences in behavior and
habitat use between translocated and non-translocated tortoises, and assessed how these differences




                                                                                                        310
affected carapace temperatures. Tortoises were randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups:
translocated (displaced 2, 5, or 8 km from their source location), or control. After translocation, twenty
percent of the translocated tortoises were able to navigate back to their source location, and translocation
distance had an effect on their ability to navigate home. We found 44 % of tortoises in the 2 km
translocated group returned home, whereas no tortoises in the 8 km translocated group did. We also
found that translocated tortoises moved more than the control groups, with some individuals moving > 10
km from the translocation site. Furthermore, we found that translocated tortoises exhibited different
placement, position, and activity patterns within their habitat when compared to control tortoises. Although
there were no significant carapace temperature differences between translocated and control tortoises
across all ambient temperatures, we found translocated tortoises had significantly higher carapace
temperatures when the ambient temperature was >29°C. By identifying homing behaviors, quantifying
movement patterns, and investigating behavior and habitat associations in desert tortoises, this in-situ
experiment addresses key data gaps that may have limited the efficacy of tortoise translocation efforts.



Hinojosa, Silvia (UNAM);

Genetic Differences between Giant Manta ray (Manta birostris) and the Yucatan Giant Manta ray.
Ma

Based on coloration and morfological differences, the existence of a possible third species for the genus
Manta has been suggested in previous studies. At least two morphotypes with variations in mouth, ventral
and dorsal colorations as well as in some key morphological features has been observed in the giant
manta of the Mexican Carribean. In order to test the hypothesis about whether those differences are
produced by environment or have a genetic basis we used several mitochondrial DNA markers both
nuclear (RAG1) and mitocondrial (ND5, COI, 12S and 16S), to determine if there are enough
differentiation levels to further contribute to the definition of the possible third manta ray species
previously reported. In addition samples of M. birostris and Manta sp .were sent to be analyzed by new
generation sequencing techniques to create a genomic library and to look for otrher possible differences
in the complete mitocondrial genome. This work reveals our primary findings using ND5 and COI genes.
The DNA from 30 samples collected at Holbox Mexico and Revillagigedo Islands, were amplifyed ,
sequenced, aligned and compared to determine if it exists enough genetic variation between the Mexican
populations and the previously reported species ( Manta birostris ). The sequences for each mtDNA
region, are being compared with those of Pacific in order to estimate the mean genetic divergence and
their correlation with isolation processes.



Hipolito, Marcio (Instituto Biológico); Ferreira, Claudia M.; Dias, Danielle C.; Baldi, Ludmila C. (Instituto
de Pesca, Canada)

Histopathogical aspect of tumoral formation in bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus (Rana
catesbeiana Shaw, 1802), Brazil.

The authors describe the histopathological aspect of tumor from adult animal, female, bullfrog (
Lithobates catesbeianus, Shaw, 1802), breeding from a frogfarm near Sorocaba city, São Paulo state,
Brazil, with five years of age, since a decrease of their reproductive function, placed in an aquarium for
exhibition, where he lived for about 1 month. During this short period, it had revealed apathy, increase of
the ventral region, anorexy and die. In the necropsy it was observed an aggregate formation to the liver
and ovary, having been collected 2 distinct and separated portions from the tumor, settled in neutral



                                                                                                         311
formalin solution 20% buffered and prepared for the histopathology with the hematoxylin and eosin stain.
In an portion, the tumor showed cystic formation, adhered to the liver and involved for conjunctive tissue
capsule. Some fibrocytes with hypertrophic nucleus and others with pycnotic nuclei, also presence of
areas in necrosis and areas with cellular remaining portions and focal areas with an increased number of
linfocytes and melanomacrophages. It is observed, in parenchyma, a nodule, well circumscribed with
conjunctive tissue and more linfocytes and melanomacrophages. Adhered to the capsule, was observed
innumerables oocytes in different stages of development and in this area is presented several blood
vessels congested. In the another portion, presence of squamous epithelium with many hypertrophics
cells or hypertrophics nucleus and nucleolus evident of unknown origin for optic microscopy and areas
where we can observe numerous glands spread in epithelial tissue. Also innumerables blood vessels
congested or with hyaline material in the lumen of blood vessels. Some areas in necrosis and an
accented number of melanomacrophages is also observed. This formation can be characterized as a
benign neoplasm tumor of unknown origin. No similar cases were observed in commercial frogfarm
where these animals came. Regardless of the cause of death, in all animals necropsied,
tumor formations are sought, since it is believed that there is no known occurrence.



Hipolito, Marcio (Instituto Biológico); Martins, Ana M. Cristina R.P.F. (Instituto Biologico, São Paulo,
Brazil); Ferreira, Claudia M. (Instituto de Pesca, São Paulo, Brazil); Antonucci, Antonio M. (Universidade
Estadual de Maringá, Maringá, Brazil)

Report of congenital anomalies with malformations in bullfrogs Lithobates catesbeianus (Rana
catesbeiana, Shaw, 1802) in São Paulo, Brazil.

The occurrence of four different types of malformation, after metamorphosis, in bullfrogs (Lithobates
catesbeianus) from commercial frogfarm of the region middle valley of the River Paraíba do Sul, Sao
Paulo State, Brazil, are reported. All these occurrences were observed in the course of two years and
they have never been concurrent. They affected several batches at different times. The number of
animals with deformities ranged from only a few to hundreds. It was observed, ordered in increasing
number of malformations: complete additional limbs, both front and rear, one by animal and the extra
formations derived from the initial portion of the original limbs, with a small number of frogs. The second
type of malformation found was the occurrence of cases of malformation in the ocular region and eyes,
found in tens of bullfrogs, varying from complete agenesis of this organ to the formation of large globular
structures and in some animals the eyes were complete, in others they were only partially formed, the
malformation being bilateral, either symmetrical or asymmetrical. The third occurrence, found in hundreds
of bullfrogs, was no formation of the hind limbs, yet showing bilateral symmetry, the cases varying from
complete agenesis to the complete formation of the legs, but with no fingers or some of them missing.
The last and most frequent occurrence, in hundreds of animals, was a malformation of the spine, with the
presence of kyphosis, lordosis and scoliosis. As soon as those anomalies were found, the affected
animals were removed and sacrificed, because of the difficulty they met in moving and getting food. The
others, that didn't show any malformations immediately after metamorphosis, went through a normal
development. Most likely the cause of these anomalies is congenital, as there was a high rate of
inbreeding in this squad. The observations were made in the years 2008 and 2009, and in the next year
this frogfarm was closed, because the property was sold. At present there is no report of anomalies that
serious, due to the care given at frogfarms, where inbreeding is avoided. Previous reports of congenital
anomalies were found, all due to inbreeding as well. The bullfrogs bred in Brazil are all descended from
30 couples, imported several decades ago, and not renewed so far, due to the legal difficulties in the
importation of new animals. The inbreeding is controlled to some extent, by the current Brazilian farmers,




                                                                                                       312
through the choice of the animals for mating from other frogfarms, preferably as far away as northern and
southern Brazil.



Hippe, Scott (Gonzaga University); Propper, Cathy (Northern Arizona University, Canada); Staub, Nancy
(Gonzaga University, Spokane, WA, United States)

The presence of sexually dimorphic submandibular glands in Taricha granulosa, the Rough-
Skinned Newt (Salamandridae)

We test the hypothesis that the salamandrid Taricha granulosa , the rough-skinned newt, possesses
pheromone-producing courtship glands in the submandibular dermis. This hypothesis repeatedly appears
in the literature based on courtship behavior in which males press their chins on females‘ nares and on a
small histological study. We identify a sexually dimorphic granular gland in the submandibular region of
male newts. Its secretion was granular and PAS-positive, in contrast to the PAS-negative secretion of
typical granular glands. The gland was found only in males and only in the anterior submandibular region.
Compared to glands evaluated from non-breeding males, the glands from animals collected in the
breeding season were hypertrophied. This sexually dimorphic granular gland is distinct from the mental
gland found in plethodontid salamanders; the plethodontid mental gland is an aggregate of individual
glands whereas the granular glands in Taricha granulosa are not clustered together. Our results support
the hypothesis that males are secreting pheromones from submandibular glands during courtship in T.
granulosa.



Hipsley, Christy (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin); Müller, Johannes (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin,
Canada)

Evolutionary consequences of Cenozoic climate change on African lacertid lizards (Squamata:
Lacertidae)

The Lacertidae is a large family of Old World lizards with considerable variation in clade size, morphology
and ecology. In contrast to the global pattern of increasing biodiversity towards the tropics, African
lacertids are most diverse in deserts north and south of the equator, despite being spread throughout the
continent. This disparity in species richness is particularly surprising given that desert lacertids are
thought to be evolutionarily younger than their mesic relatives, suggesting increased speciation rates in
arid habitats. To identify the environmental and evolutionary factors underlying this pattern, we used a
combination of phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological approaches to estimate timing and rates of
diversification for the main lineages, and to test if historical shifts in ecology, morphology, and rates of
diversification coincide with paleoclimatic events.

A time-calibrated phylogeny for Lacertidae was constructed based on 1012 bp of the nuclear gene RAG1
and 3 fossil-calibrated nodes with hard minimum and soft maximum bounds. Our results suggest that
lacertids arose in the early Cenozoic and entered Africa about 45 million years ago, with the majority of
their African radiation occurring in the Eocene and Oligocene.

Based on the above branch lengths, rates of diversification were estimated for the main clades. The
African radiation as a whole shows higher rates of diversification than their Palearctic sister clade
throughout the Oligocene to mid-Miocene. Within the African radiation, desert-dwelling taxa also show
higher diversification rates early in their evolutionary histories than equatorial African and temperate
groups. Colonization of independent deserts is also accompanied by similar derived morphologies,



                                                                                                        313
including an overall decrease in ossification and fusion of cranial bones. Geometric morphometric
analysis of 3-D Computed Tomography scans shows that these taxa achieve convergent cranial
morphologies via enlarged orbits, lengthening and narrowing of the snout and frontals, and shortening of
the postorbital region. Ancestral state reconstruction of morphology and habitat suggests that these traits
evolved with the onset of aridification in Africa. These results emphasize the importance of deserts as
centers of reptile evolution and provide comparative climate impact data for terrestrial vertebrates.



Hirschfeld, Mareike (Museum fuer Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin); Roedel, Mark-Oliver (Museum fuer Naturkunde, Leibniz
Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin, Berlin, Canada)

Life history traits and adaptation ability to changing environments? - Leaf-litter frogs in the
Cameroonian highlands.

Globally many species are negatively affected by fragmentation and alteration of the climate. In particular
species living in tropical highlands suffer from these environmental changes as dispersal from
disappearing to appropriate habitats is limited. The respective species thus are captured on their
mountain ‘islands‗. However, the susceptibility of different species to the same environmental changes
may vary due to differences in their resilience to these changes. Such variation may depend on a variety
of different species-specific ‘ecological properties‗; like e.g. dispersal ability, mean maximum age,
reproductive strategy and investment, trophic niche, physiological constraints and in sum their habitat
preferences. Most tropical leaf-litter frogs occur in forested habitats. Although belonging to different
taxonomic groups, their environmental requirements often seem similar. However, it is apparent that
some species may tolerate forest degradation to partly huge extends, whereas others are exclusively
found in primary tropical forest with closed canopy. We herein ask if this variation of mountainous frog
species in adaptability to forest degradation is related to their particular sets of ecological properties.

The study is conducted on the Mount Manengouba, a peak of the volcanic chain in southwestern
Cameroon. Apart from the altitudinal gradient (up to 2411 m asl) there are horizontal and vertical
gradients of habitats ranging from pristine forest to farmbush. This mountainous region is exceptional
concerning amphibian species richness (> 100 species), including a high diversity of leaf-litter frogs
belonging to different genera (e.g. Cardioglossa, Phrynobatrachus ). First results revealed high variation
in adaptability of species to environmental changes even within one genus. For instance, Cardioglossa
species vary not only in their altitudinal ranges, but as well in their occurrences along different degraded
habitat types. We investigate species distributions in correlation to species specific ecological traits, using
different leaf-litter frogs (related and non-related genera) on the Mount Manengouba as example.



Hitchmough, Rod (New Zealand Department of Conservation); Bauer, Aaron; Nielsen, Stuart (Villanova
University, Canada)

Alpha taxonomy of the New Zealand gecko radiation

Proposed changes to alpha taxonomy of New Zealand geckos are presented. Nielsen et al. (2011)
presented a robust phylogeny for the New Zealand gecko radiation and a comprehensive range of
outgroups in the Diplodactylidae. In this paper they also revised the generic taxonomy, increasing the
number of recognised genera from two to seven. They listed both named and proposed, un-named
species in each genus. Since then, formal descriptions have been prepared for the previously un-named
species, and a monograph will soon be submitted for publication. This work is summarised in this poster,



                                                                                                           314
and some taxonomic issues are discussed. In the genera Woodworthia and Dactylocnemis , species
recognised here are deeply divergent, and sympatry or at least marginal overlap of sister species is
common. Woodworthia may remain under-split; within species some monophyletic geographic clusters
of populations are diagnosable genetically and morphologically. In Naultinus , and Mokopirirakau ,
sympatry is very rare and many sister species pairs have much lower levels of divergence; however,
species are mostly morphologically easily diagnosable and have abutting, non-overlapping ranges.
Tukutuku, Toropuku and Hoplodactylus are each monophyletic, but the latter two genera each have
widely allopatric northern and southern clades which are divergent in DNA sequence and morphology at
levels comparable to those between sister species in Naultinus and Mokopirirakau . However, the
geographic gaps in the distributions of these genera are known or suspected to be recent and human-
induced – an understanding of the pre-human distribution of variation in these gaps is required before a
robust taxonomy can be proposed.



Hleihel, Walid (Holy Spirit University of Kaslik); Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese
University,, Fanar, Lebanon); Ziad Fajloun, Ziad (Azm Center for the Research in Biotechnology and its
Applications Lebanese University, Tripoli, Canada); Sadek, Riyad (Biology Department, American
University of Beirut, Beirut, Beirut)

Effects and characterisation of the venom of Montevipera bornmuelleri on a murine model

In the present study, we have evaluated the lethal, hemorrhagic and necrotic activities of Montevipera
bornmuelleri fresh venom. Our results indicated that the venom of this snake species had an important
lethal activity and average hemorrhagic and necrotic activities (in the area of subcutaneous injection of
venom into mice) with good correlation between the venom doses and these toxic effects. The
intramuscular median lethal dose was estimated at 12.19 mg/kg. The minimum hemorrhagic and necrotic
doses of Montevipera bornmuelleri venom were evaluated at 225 μg and 180 μg respectively. Histological
observations of the brain, cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic, renal and muscle tissue, after intramuscular
injection into mice of different doses of the venom of Montevipera bornmuelleri haven‘t showed any deep
hemorrhage or necrosis.



Hoare, Jo (New Zealand Department of Conservation); Lettink, Marieke (Fauna Finders, Christchurch,
New Zealand); Batson, William; O'Donnell, Colin (Department of Conservation, Christchurch, New
Zealand)

Developing monitoring techniques for cryptic lizard taxa in New Zealand

Robust monitoring is essential to evaluating the effectiveness of conservation management. For many
cryptic taxa, including herpetofauna, reliable, standardised techniques do not exist. In New Zealand, no
established monitoring technique exists for many threatened lizard species. Recent developments of
novel techniques for reptiles, particularly the use of various artificial retreats and footprint tracking tunnels,
show considerable promise. However, to gain confidence in novel techniques, research is required to: (1)
develop optimal protocols that minimise variability, (2) evaluate assumptions and (3) assess whether
indices of abundance from monitoring retreats reflect population size estimates obtained through an
independent method. We used a high density population of common skinks, Oligosoma polychroma, in
Fiordland National Park, New Zealand to evaluate and develop standardised protocols for the use of
artificial retreats for monitoring cryptic lizards in New Zealand. At this site, skink sightings beneath
retreats were most consistent at intermediate temperatures of 12-18 degrees Celsius and in dry
conditions. Permanent placement of artificial retreats influenced demographic composition and frequency



                                                                                                              315
of skinks using retreats, but not their body condition, relative to temporarily placed retreats. Skink counts
from artificial retreats provided a reasonably accurate and highly precise index of population size
(obtained from capture-mark-recapture pitfall trapping), when sampling was conducted under optimal
weather conditions. We believe that artificial retreats represent a reliable, cost-effective alternative to
other monitoring techniques for cryptic lizards and recommend that index counts from retreats be
calibrated against population size estimates for other habitats and species.



Hocking, Daniel (University of New Hampshire); Babbitt, Kimberly (University of New Hampshire,
Durham, NH, United States)

Comparison of models for analyzing seasonal salamander activity from longitudinal count data

Accurate modeling of animal activity patterns is important for biological assessment surveys,
management plans, and fundamental understanding of how organisms respond to environmental and
climatic conditions. Often for logistic reasons, researchers collect activity data of animals repeatedly from
the same sites. The resulting longitudinal data has the added benefit of being able to distinguish between
―cohort‖ and ―age‖ effects. When analyzing longitudinal data it is important to account for the correlation
associated with repeated sampling of the same sites to avoid pseudoreplication and violations of model
assumptions. This is often accomplished using subject-specific mixed-effects models. If the specific sites
are not of interest, generalized estimating equations (GEE) are computationally simpler and provide
population-level estimates. We compare GEE and mixed models for estimating seasonal activity of red-
backed salamanders ( Plethodon cinereus ). We obtained counts of salamanders from nighttime visual
encounter surveys throughout their activity season over four years. We used two modeling approaches to
evaluate these data. First, we used the same fixed effects in all models to compare salamander
responses to meteorological conditions. Second, we conducted independent model selection to
determine the best predictive model of salamander surface activity for mixed and GEE models. The first
approaches produced estimates that were in the same direction and similar rank order for all mixed-effect
and GEE models. Soil temperature had a significant quadratic effect with peak activity around 15 C.
Rainfall amount and relative humidity had positive effects on salamander surface activity and
salamanders were most active in the spring. At higher temperatures rainfall had less effect on activity and
wind speed has less effect on humid nights. However, the magnitude of the effects and the associated
error differed among models. Linear mixed models (LME) on log-transformed count data and GEE
resulted in similar estimates of the fixed effects. Generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) estimated
steeper slopes (positive and negative) for nearly all variables compared with GEE and LME models. The
second approach resulted in different models of salamander activity. All models included temperature,
rainfall, relative humidity, and windspeed as important variables. Despite differences, the overall
predictions of the models were somewhat similar.



Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Austria);

From simple field observations to a model species. Confessions of a taxon-oriented field
biologist.

An unexpected rapid phonotactic approach of a male Allobates (= Phyllobates , = Dendrobates , =
Epipedobates ) femoralis to a control replay of its recording in the Yubineto region, Northern Peru, in
1978 started my curiosity-driven research on the bioacoustics of this species. Due to its stereotypic
phonotactic response to playbacks of conspecific (Hödl, 1982) and a large variety of synthetic (Hödl,



                                                                                                         316
1987) calls I introduced     A. femoralis as a ―handy fellow‖ to the herpetological and bioacoustic
community at various scientific meetings. Rapidly ―my‖ handy fellow became the main focus of an
international research team forming a cohesive group out of a diverse collection of individual scientists.
Important inputs from Adolfo Amézquita (evolutionary aspects), Peter Narins (robotics and sensory
physiology), Albertina Lima and Pedro Ivo Simões (biogeography) as well as Eva and Max Ringler
(population biology) clearly show that taxon-centered research can be a self accelerating process. The
valuable integration of various aspects have led to more fruitful insights than would have been possible
with a pure hypothesis-based approach, which sometimes may narrow the angle of view on a given
research question. In 30 years of trying to understand a living organism in the field I have gained
increasing confidence in my scientific approach to let organisms rather than hypotheses lead me to the
important questions. And last but not least: Taxon-centered research is simply more fun!



Hoen, Danielle (University of Hawaii Manoa); Drazen, Jeffrey; Popp, Brian; Condon, Nicole (University of
Hawaii Manoa, Canada)

Does elasmobranch trophic position increase with depth? Interpreting bulk isotope data with
compound-specific isotope analysis of amino acids

Increasing fishing pressure and the threat of climate change make understanding the trophic biology of
poorly studied deep water chondrichthyans critical. Increasingly, bulk isotope analyses are utilized to
determine trophic relationships among these organisms. However, there is much uncertainty when
interpreting bulk isotope data in an ecological context. For instance, changes in baseline isotopic
composition and possible fractionation differences among organisms complicate bulk isotope analyses. It
was recently found that chondrichthyan 15N enrichment increases with depth, suggesting an apparent
increase in trophic position (TP) with depth. It has been hypothesized the production of urea by these
species may be lowering nitrogen isotope fractionation. If this is the case, decreasing urea content with
depth would drive a subsequent increase in nitrogen isotope fractionation, leading to the apparent
increase in TP indicated by bulk isotope data. We analyzed the livers of two species of skate, Raja rhina
and Amblyraja badia (median depth of occurrence: 539 m and 1585 m respectively), caught from a depth
gradient ranging over 1500 m using compound specific isotope analysis of amino acids in addition to
glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamine synthetase enzyme assays to determine if this trend was a
product of baseline δ15N changes, a change in nitrogen isotope fractionation, or an actual increase in TP.
Phenylalanine δ15N values varied little over this depth range, indicating no change in baseline δ15N
values. Rather the apparent trend may be driven by changes in fractionation due to urea retention. These
results serve to caution researchers and fisheries managers when making assumptions about ecosystem
dynamics in the deep sea based on bulk isotope data.



Hoffman, Daniel (San Francisco State University);

Fuctional Divergence Amoung HOX gene Paralogs

Functional divergence of Hox gene paralogs in zebrafish. Ray-finned fishes are the most diverse
vertebrate group, with over 27,000 species. The extraordinary success of this group has been attributed
to a whole genome duplication that occurred in the stem lineage of the teleosts, a subset of ray-finned
fishes. Hox genes are associated with body plan features, and are expressed during A-P axis formation.
In addition, many of the duplicated Hox genes have been retained in zebrafish and fugu. Using Micro




                                                                                                      317
injection techniques we found evidence for functional divergence between paralogs for HoxA11 and
HoxA13 in zebrafsh, furthering the evidence of significance behind paralog retention.



Holbrook, Aaron (The University of Southern Mississippi); Jawor, Jodie; Qualls, Carl (The University of
Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Stress response and digestive efficiency in hatchling gopher tortoises

Federally threatened in Mississippi, the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) populations there have
strongly variable recruitment and are generally in decline. Hatching success is significantly lower in
Mississippi than in any other part of the species‘ range and most hatchlings die within the first year.
Behavioral and physiological differences negatively affecting hatchling survival could be linked to altered
levels of corticosterone, a hormone that influences both energy availability and behavior and is released
in elevated levels during stressful events. One way corticosterone conserves energy is by inhibiting
digestion and in chronically stressed individuals this results in decreased digestive efficiency and growth.
We determined baseline and stress-induced corticosterone levels via restraint stress in hatchlings and we
will compare these to growth rates, gut passage time, and fecal caloric content of hatchlings housed in a
common garden environment. Restraint stress successfully increased corticosterone in a short time
period and we suggest that in reptiles a unique stressor is needed to quickly elevate corticosterone.



Holcomb, Kerry (Central Washington University); Beck, Daniel (Dept. of Biological Sciences, Central
Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States); Oliván Pliego, Jesús Eduardo (Facultad de
Ciencias Biológicas de la UAEM (Morelos), San Patricio, Jalisco, Canada); Kiester, Ross (Turtle
Conservancy, New York, NY, United States); García Aguayo, Andrés (Instituto de Biología, U.N.A.M.,
San Patricio, Jalisco, Mexico)

To Conform or Regulate, are These the Only Options? Thermal Biology of the Mexican Beaded
Lizard (Heloderma horridum) in a Tropical Dry Forest

Microhabitat choice directly influences the immediate body temperature (Tb) of a terrestrial reptile.
Relative homeothermy can, therefore, be achieved by many small reptiles (<100g), by intently shuttling
from one thermal patch to the next. Nevertheless, the drastically-different thermal dynamics of medium to
large reptiles (>500g) make active thermoregulation physically challenging and ecologically expensive,
many times prohibitively so. Thermally homogenous systems, e.g. dense closed canopy forests, further
exacerbate both the physical and ecological challenges associated with active thermoregulation. As a
result, many medium to large tropical reptiles are incapable of active thermoregulation. We contrasted, in
situ, how the Mexican Beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum horridum) manages body temperature during
the thermally-diverse dry-season (sample period, May 18 to June 20) with the thermally-homogeneous
wet-season (sample period, July 1 to August 3), of a tropical drought deciduous forest in Chamela,
Jalisco, Mexico. Specifically, we used spectral analysis to compare individual Tb time series with twelve
environmental temperature (Te) time series—Te was measured using biophysical models. We used
implantable radiotransmitters (IMP-200L, Telonics, Mesa, Arizona) to spatially track lizards and ground-
truth our temperature based refuge use estimation as well as collect burrow temperature data.
Thermocron ibuttonTM (DS1922L, 0.5°C accuracy, Maxim, Dallas, TX) temperature dataloggers were
used to record body temperatures at 15 minute intervals (n = 6 lizards). Body mass varied between a
dry-season average of 1088g to a wet-season average of 1275g, The body temperature of active beaded
lizards did not differ significantly from concurrent shaded air temperature, in both the dry and wet




                                                                                                        318
seasons, indicating a conformist strategy to thermoregulation. Yet, shelters used by beaded lizards
showed temperatures closer to beaded lizards‘ thermal set point than did shelters that were available, yet
unoccupied. Thermal selectivity in refuge choice, as well as temporal patterns of refuge use, enable
beaded lizards to regulate Tbs tightly. For instance, 54.4 percent of dry-season and 30.4 percent of wet-
season Tbs fell between 27.1 and 29.9?C, body temperatures that agree with a Set-point temperature
range (Tset—i.e. preferred body temperature)—of 27.5?C to 31.25?C (n=5 lizards). Rather than active
behavioral thermoregulation, beaded lizards seem to regulate body temperature more by choosing
refuges offering an appropriate thermal environment. Furthermore, homeothermy achieved using this
strategy can be held for many days, a level of thermal stability that is impossible to maintain through
active behavioral thermoregulation.



Holding, Matthew (Ohio State University); Frazier, Julius (Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, United States);
Dorr, Scott (California Polytechnic State U, San Luis Obispo, United States); Pollack, Nicholas (Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, United States); Muelleman, PJ (U. Louisiana Lafeyette, Lafayette, United
States); Branske, Amber (Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, United States); Henningsen, Sloane (None,
Columbus, United States); Montgomery, Chad (Truman State U., Kirksville, Canada); Taylor, Emily
(California Polytechnic State U, San Luis Obispo, United States)

Snakes Living the Island Life: Hormone Profiles and Stress Reactivity of the Hog Island Boa (Boa
constrictor imperator)

Field studies that broaden the comparative framework for inference into the evolutionary and ecological
factors shaping organismal physiology are extremely important, often leading to novel physiological
insight and discovering new model systems for future work. We explored factors associated with the
circulating sex steroid hormone concentrations and adrenocortical response to acute capture and
handling stress in the Hog Island boa (Boa constrictor imperator), which inhabits the Cayos Cochinos
Archipelago of Honduras. This is a novel system, in both a phylogenetic and geographic sense, for work
in field endocrinology because no previous description of hormone profiles in basal Alethinophidian
snakes is available and because these snakes have been isolated from mainland populations since the
last glacial maximum. Plasma steroid concentrations in these snakes were notably low in comparison to
other snakes. We report a number of seasonal and sex differences in hormone concentrations. Notably,
we observed high testosterone concentrations in males and high testosterone, estradiol, and
corticosterone concentrations in females during the wet season that are likely indicative of breeding
activities and vitellogenesis during this time. The Hog Island boa displayed an average four-fold increase
in plasma corticosterone concentrations due to our acute capture and handling stressor, a rise that was
not impacted by whether or not a snake had been captured and handled during previous years. More
work is required to determine whether these snakes display ‗island tameness‘ in their physiology or
behavior. The adrenocortical stress response was larger in males and positively related to both body
condition and body temperature. A positive relationship between body condition and the adrenocortical
response to acute stress is contrary to the bulk of previous reports and we discuss potential determinants
of this relationship. We suggest that this system is one that merits future inquiries into its physiology and
behavior, especially as a model for studying insular impacts on diverse life history characters. Such
efforts, when combined with outreach, may prove important for the conservation of island populations of
B. constrictor spp.




                                                                                                         319
Hollensead, Lisa (Florida State University); Carlson, John; Bethea, Dana (NOAA NMFS Panama City
Laboratory, Panama City, FL, United States); Grubbs, R. Dean (Florida State Coast Marine Laboratory,
St. Teresa, FL, United States)

Monitoring movement patterns of juvenile smalltooth sawfish (Pristis pectinata) using acoustic
monitoring and tracking in a nursery habitat in southwest Florida

Historically, the U.S. range of smalltooth sawfish stretched from North Carolina to Texas including the
Gulf of Mexico. Due to fisheries bycatch, habitat loss, and a low productivity, the US population has
declined leading to their inclusion on the U.S. Endangered Species Act in 2003. Necessary to their
recovery is a description of critical habitat, mandated in the Smalltooth Sawfish Recovery Plan. Using
passive acoustic telemetry and active tracking, precise delineation of smalltooth sawfish activity space
and patterns of habitat use can be determined. Juvenile smalltooth sawfish less than 1.5 meter total
length were fitted with two Vemco acoustic tags. An R coded tag was used to passively monitor
movements with an array of 32 VR2w receivers in Everglades National Park and 3 VR2w receivers in
Faka Union Bay, Florida. A continuous tag was used for active tracking using a VR100 hydrophone. In
2011, 24 animals were captured and fitted with acoustic transmitters. Residency time was found to be
longer than previously hypothesized with animals remaining in the system through out the winter months.
Seven animals were actively tracked for a minimum of 4 hours and a maximum of 32 hours. Benthic
samples and mangrove habitat properties were measured in an effort to create a habitat selectivity model.
For the benthic samples, percent sand, silt, clay and organic content were measured. Mangrove habitat
was measured throughout the two study sites and was categorized by branch overhang, prop root
density, and rhizome density. Other abiotic factors (temp, depth etc) were also measured.



Holmes, Bonnie (University of Queensland);

Long-term movement patterns of satellite tagged tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) in south
eastern Australia

The tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) is one of the highest trophic order predators in Australia‘s coastal
marine waters. Described as a tropical species, G. cuvier movements into southern sub-tropical and
warm temperate waters have previously been assumed to occur seasonally in the austral summer.
Determining movement patterns and habitat use is vital for better understanding the role of tiger sharks in
structuring coastal communities. As a species potentially dangerous to bathers, it is also important to
understand when and where interactions with humans are likely to occur. Pop-up archival (PAT) and
Smart Positioning or Temperature Transmitting (SPOT) satellite tags were used to investigate seasonal
movement and site fidelity of tiger sharks in southern Queensland and northern New South Wales. A total
of 12 tiger sharks were tagged between 2007–2011 across a range of sizes, sexes and seasons.
Preliminary results indicate that some large and small tiger sharks of both sexes will remain in southern
Queensland waters during the cooler winter months. Depth profiles obtained from PAT tags indicated
maximum depths of over 1760 m, deeper than previously reported for the species, with water
temperatures as low as 5.9 degrees celsius. The greatest distance travelled was ≈1800 km, from Botany
Bay NSW to New Caledonian waters after 48 days at liberty. Notwithstanding this, the majority of
individuals maintained some fidelity to the coastal zone highlighting the importance of near-shore habitat.
We hypothesise that habitat utilisation is driven predominantly by prey availability.




                                                                                                       320
Holmes, Nick (Island Conservation); Butchart, Stuart (Birdlife International, Cambridge, United Kingdom);
Croll, Donald (Coastal and Conservation Action Lab, University of California at Santa Cruz, Canada);
Kiett, Brad (Island Conservation, Canada); McCreless, Erin; Newton, Kelly; Spatz, Dena; Tershy, Bernie
(Coastal and Conservation Action Lab, University of California at Santa Cruz, Canada)

Preventing reptile extinctions on islands: Assessing removal of invasive vertebrates at a global
scale

Islands make up only 5% of the earth‘s land area, but 64% of known species extinctions since ~1600
have taken place on islands and 37% of IUCN Critically Endangered species currently inhabit them.
Invasive vertebrates are the primary cause of insular extinctions, and the second greatest contributor to
endangerment of insular species today. Invasive vertebrates have been successfully eradicated from
>700 islands worldwide. These eradication efforts should be directed to islands and archipelagos that
offer the greatest biodiversity benefits. We have developed a database of the world‘s insular IUCN
Critically Endangered (CR) and Endangered (EN) vertebrates, using the IUCN Red List, UNEP Global
Island Database, Global Invasive Species Database, published and gray literature, and expert opinion.
Excluding sea turtles, we identified 169 CR or EN insular-breeding reptile species with populations on 433
islands. The Caribbean has a rich concentration of endemic and threatened insular reptile populations
where eradicating invasive vertebrates is technologically feasible (<30,000 ha and <1,000 people). Mona
island (Puerto Rico), with 4 CR/EN species, is a particularly important Caribbean island for insular
reptiles. This database can help facilitate eradication of invasive vertebrates from islands to benefit
threatened species.



Hölting, Monique (Museum of Zoology, Senckenberg Natural History Collections); Ernst, Raffael
(Senckenberg Natural History Collections, Dresden, Germany)

Logging AND Frogging? Exploration of Amphibian Diversity in the Selectively Logged Tropical
Forests of Guyana

Guyana is one of the most intensely forested tropical countries, where forest resources cover more than
three quarters of its land area. Even though in the past Guyana has had one of the lowest deforestation
rates of the world, timber value has long been recognized and 13.5 of its approximately 15 million ha of
rainforest is classified as state forest and thus potentially open to logging. Only little is known about the
actual consequences of logging for complex forest ecosystems and the question is, whether or not
sustainable forestry can be an adequate strategy to mitigate possible negative impacts. Our study aims to
fill that gap by resolving interactions between different levels of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in
a region that is subject to selective sustainable silviculture. We use amphibian communities as a suitable
and sensitive organismic model. The main study is being conducted within a controlled polycyclic timber
harvesting scheme implemented by our project partner Iwokrama International Centre for Rainforest
Conservation and Development under the auspices of Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). First results
covering data for three consecutive years of investigation in the Iwokrama forest illustrate, that actual
changes in amphibian diversity between ‗pristine‘ and reduced impact logging areas are quite complex.
Both extreme climatic events and logging activities seem to affect amphibian diversity. There are
―winners‖ and ―losers‖, and while some species disappear, others recolonize. The challenge will be to
disentangle the various components leading to these changes, and resolving the underlying mechanisms.
This will not only be important to guarantee the long-term viability of particular species at risk, but also to
maintain the key feature of Guyana‘s forest, its biodiversity.




                                                                                                           321
Honda, Masanao (University of Tsukuba); Kurita, Takaki (University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan);
Toda, Mamoru (University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Canada); Ota, Hidetoshi (Institute of Natural and
Environmental Sciences and Museum of Nature and Human Activities, University of Hyogo, Hyogo,
Japan)

Phylogenetic relationships, genetic divergence and biogeography of Goniurosaurus kuroiwae
(Squamata: Eublepharidae) from the Central Ryukyus, Japan

The Kuroiwa's eyelid gecko Goniurosaurus kuroiwae is an endangered eublepharid species endemic to
the Central Ryukyus, Janan, and includes five recognized subspecies. Since there are considerable
geographical and morphological gaps between this species and the other congeners, all from
southeastern Continental China including Hainan Island and several off-shore islets, the former is
considered to be in an extremely relict state as a result of initial continental-insular vicariance and
subsequent extinction of related populations that had once occurred in the eastern part of the continent,
Taiwan, and the Southern Ryukyus. Also, subspecific diversification of G. kuroiwae has been considered
as a result of temporal changes in land configuration around the current Central Ryukyus. In the present
study, we examined phylogenetic relationships among the five subspecies of G. kuroiwae by analyzing
approximately 1,200 base positions of mitochondrial 12S and 16S rRNAs, and cytochrome b genes. Our
purposes are to test the currently prevailing morphology-based phylogenetic hypothesis for these
subspecies, and to discuss their genetic divergence and biogeography. Results of the analyses confirm
monophyly of populations representing the five subspecies of G. kuroiwae against the continental
congeners, and show a considerable genetic divergence of the former from the latter. However, our
results do not support the relationships hypothesized on the morphological ground in that the present
results strongly suggest 1) the primary dichotomy, with substantial genetic divergence, between G. k.
splendens from the Amami Island Group and the remaining subspecies, all from the Okinawa Island
Group, and 2) the presence of at least six independent lineages within the latter assemblage , indicating
non-monophylies of G. k. kuroiwae and G. k. orientalis. The prominent genetic divergence in G.
kuroiwae populations between the two island groups of the Central Ryukyus seems to have initiated in
the Miocene, i.e., prior to formations of those straits that have consistently been separating these island
groups since the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene. It is probable that the strong preference by G.
kuroiwae of subtropical karst limestone areas covered with humid vegetations, such as primary or well
recovered secondary forests, might have played a crucial role in isolating its populations on an apparently
single Central Ryukyu land mass. On the other hand, divergences within the Okinawa Island Group may
reflect almost concurrent vicariances involved by the Pleistocene sea level changes. It is noteworthy that
each of the samples from a few small islets have lost their genetic diversities completely or almost
completely in sequences examined. This result, along with recent reduction of suitable habitats on most
of those islets, strongly suggests an urgent necessity of effective conservation measures there.



Hopkins, Brittney (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William; Jones, Devin; Willson, John (Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, United States)

Maternal Mercury Exposure Has Negative Consequences on Turtle Reproduction

In addition to the suite of beneficial resources (e.g. antibodies, hormones, and nutrients) that females
allocate to their offspring, research has demonstrated that females can maternally transfer a wide variety
of harmful contaminants. For example, the maternal transfer of mercury (Hg), a common and highly toxic
environmental contaminant, has been shown to negatively influence several reproductive parameters in
birds, fish and amphibians. Additionally, Hg can bioaccumulate and biomagnify within food webs,
exposing long-lived apex predators to high concentrations of Hg. Based on these observations, we



                                                                                                       322
evaluated the consequences maternally transferred Hg on a long-lived aquatic omnivore. We collected
eggs and tissues from gravid female snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina) at various locations along an
Hg contaminated gradient at a historically contaminated river and at various nearby reference sites. We
incubated eggs in the laboratory, quantified embryonic morality, infertility, and hatching success of each
clutch, and assessed all hatchlings and dead embryos for gross morphological malformations. As
predicted, female turtles inhabiting contaminated areas accumulated high levels of Hg in their tissues,
and female Hg concentrations were strongly and positively correlated with Hg levels in their eggs. We
found that egg Hg was negatively correlated with hatching success and that decreased hatching success
was mediated through increased egg infertility and embryonic mortality. However, we found no effect of
egg Hg on malformation frequency, clutch size, or egg mass. This is the first study to demonstrate
relationships between maternally transferred Hg on hatchling survival in turtles. Ultimately, the lethal
effects of Hg on offspring could affect turtle population viability and may serve as a source of undesirable
phenotypic variation within turtle populations inhabiting Hg contaminated areas.



Hopkins, Gareth (Department of Biology, Utah State University); Susannah, French; Edmund, Brodie
(Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT, United States)

Embryonic survival in salt among Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa) families

Osmotic balance is a constant physiological challenge for amphibians, having highly permeable skin, and
as such, tolerance to salt is rare in this group of animals. High concentrations of salt are, however, often
ubiquitous in amphibian breeding habitats, originating either from natural (e.g., estuarine water) or
anthropogenic sources (e.g., road de-icing salt). While much work has been conducted on the responses
of larval and adult amphibians to salt, considerably less is known about the responses of earlier life-
history stages. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of two common road salts, NaCl and
MgCl2 on the embryonic survival and development of Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa) eggs.
We raised eggs from 16 different females separately in three different randomly assigned concentrations
of each salt as well as in a control solution and measured egg survival, time to hatching, and
developmental stage and size at hatching. Treatment, female, and the interaction of treatment and
female all had significant effects on survival, time to hatching and stage and size at hatching. While
increased salt concentration caused higher egg mortality, quicker hatching timing, and lessened
embryonic development at hatching, it also caused the variation in effects among different female‘s
offspring to increase significantly. Broad-sense heritability calculations also revealed that the variation
among females in the hatching timing and embryonic development of their offspring is genetically
heritable in nature. This significant heritable variation in embryonic survival and development in salt