e been limited in terms of lack of experimental manipulation at the
landscape scale and failure to adequately replicate experimental treatments. We carried out a four year
replicated study in semi-arid Australia investigating the impacts of four alternative water point closure
treatments on the native reptile community. The treatments in the experiment were: 1) fencing to exclude
mammalian grazers; 2) partial tank closure by blocking of inlets to reduce catchment of runoff; 3)
complete tank closure through backfilling; 4) untreated to act as a control. Each of these treatments was
replicated three times, and pitfall trapping sites were established at varying distances from each replicate;
20, 500 and 1500 meters and in dune and swale habitats. In addition to reptiles, plant structure and
floristics and soil characteristics were monitored at each site to assess their potential effect on reptiles.
Results indicate changes in reptile community structure in relation to distance from water and treatment
type which may have implications for management of water points in the arid zone.



Corey-Rivas, Sarah (New Mexico Highlands University);

Threatened amphibian species in Venezuela's socioecological landscape: people, parks and
indigenous lands

Current conservation practices rely heavily on the need for protected areas. This is especially true
regarding the amphibian extinction crisis. However, parks and people are inextricably linked in this global
crisis and broader scale geographic and anthropogenic interactions must be accounted for. The aim of
this study is to investigate spatial patterns in amphibian species vulnerability in megadiverse Venezuela
and identify successful scenarios for amphibians in terms of people, parks and environment. I evaluate
the use of spatially explicit measures of general and indigenous human population density, park
presence, human footprint, net primary productivity, and elevation to predict threatened amphibian
species distributions. These factors are assessed using an information theoretic approach (AIC) and a
simultaneous autoregressive model (SAR), which also account for spatialdependence. I then test
assumptions that parks and their underlying protectionist paradigm work to protect amphibian species.



                                                                                                         146
Finally, I search for local spatial autocorrelation (LISA) in species richness, endemics, threatened and
data deficient species, and identify geographic hotspots of species at risk. Results of this study
demonstrate that traditional measures of human impact (density and footprint) effectively predict higher
numbers of threatened amphibian species. However, indigenous peoples population density does not
predict abundance of threatened species. Accounting for spatial dependence in the landscape reveals
that cultural stewardship, i.e., parks on indigenous versus non-indigenous land, cannot predict
threatened species distributions, failing to validate typical conservation concerns over indigenous
population impacts to parks and biodiversity.      The LISA analysis reveals that the northwest region of
Venezuela is a hotspot of threatened, endemic, and unknown amphibian species. Overall, this study
demonstrates that a landscape approach to understanding threats can help to empirically identify socially
and ecologically successful or risky scenarios for amphibians and move away from a priori expectations
embodied in traditional notions of the impacts of parks and people.



Corke, Jarrett (WWF-Canada); Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS, Canada)

Fishers' Knowledge for Elasmobranch Conservation

Bycatch and unaccountable discard mortality in fishing operations are the primary threat to
elasmobranchs in Atlantic Canada. Pelagic and groundfish longline, mid-water and bottom trawl fisheries
account for the largest proportion of shark bycatch. Enhanced data collection is needed to accurately
estimate bycatch mortality, but additional important information on non-target species catches in
commercial fisheries can be accessed by direct communication with fishermen. To gather this knowledge
for WWF-Canada, qualitative interviews were conducted with pelagic and groundfish longline captains.
The objectives were to: 1) through a mapping exercise, determine spatial and temporal distributions of
elasmobranchs and identify potential bycatch hotspots; 2) identify modifications to fishing practices
employed by fishers in response to elasmobranch interactions; 3) identify methods to reduce and/or avoid
bycatch; and 4) describe fishers‘ attitudes and perceptions towards elasmobranchs and the bycatch of
these species.

This study will be completed by the summer of 2012. Results thus far indicate that fishermen have a
considerable knowledge of elasmobranchs. Blue sharks (Prionace glauca) were the elasmobranch
species most commonly caught in both pelagic and groundfish longline fisheries. Fishermen reported a
significant change in both the size and age blue sharks they caught over the past decade, potentially
indicating shifts in overall population structure of this species in the NW Atlantic. A mapping exercise has
also revealed the spatial and temporal distributions of areas where certain bycaught species are
consistently encountered (e.g. Portuguese dogfish, Centroscymnus coelolepis).

Significant conservation benefits can be obtained from fishers‘ knowledge, which can provide a real-time
perspective of the current circumstances on the water. Through integration of scientific literature with the
study results, a more comprehensive perspective may emerge on the elasmobranch bycatch problem in
Atlantic Canada. Furthermore, results may inform the future direction of management objectives to further
elasmobranch conservation in Atlantic Canada.




                                                                                                        147
Corn, Stephen (US Geological Survey); Muths, Erin (US Geologica Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United
States); Patla, Debra (Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative, Jackson, WY, United States);
Hossack, Blake (US Geological Survey, Missoula, MT, United States); Gould, William (New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces, NM, United States); Peterson, Charles (Idaho State University, Pocatello, ID,
United States)

Trends in amphibian populations in U.S. national parks on the continental divide

The U.S. Geological Survey‘s Amphibian Research and Monitoring Initiative (ARMI) conducts long-term
monitoring of amphibian populations in a hierarchical manner with varying levels of effort and spatial
coverage. At the middle level of this hierarchy, study areas are often national parks or national wildlife
refuges with a defined area of inference, and samples are selected using a probabilistic design.
Occupancy and associated vital rates are used to evaluate status and trends. ARMI‘s Rocky Mountain
Region and the National Park Service‘s Greater Yellowstone Inventory and Monitoring Network conduct
monitoring at this scale along a transect composed of the national parks in 3 regions on the Continental
Divide, including Glacier National Park in the north, Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks in the
middle, and Rocky Mountain National Park in the south. The transect covers 8° of latitude and the parks
differ in size, climate, vegetation, and amounts of human influence. Beginning in 2005, we selected
random samples of small drainages (catchments) in each park. . We hypothesized that catchments, which
contained an average of 8 wetlands with suitable breeding habitat for amphibians, better represent
functional populations and may be less influenced by stochastic variation. Each wetland in a catchment
was surveyed at least twice each year for presence of breeding populations, and presence/non-detection
of each species was aggregated among the wetlands in each catchment. We found strong differences in
occupancy among species and between regions. Occupancy was lowest in Rocky Mountain National
Park and highest in Glacier National Park, and of the species broadly distributed in each park, the boreal
toad was least abundant in all regions. Initial analyses will evaluate the evidence for declines of each
species in each region. These data constitute a good baseline for evaluating future changes to amphibian
populations in the Rocky Mountains. Given existing and potential threats from the amphibian chytrid
fungus and potential threats to amphibian habitat from climate change, continued monitoring of amphibian
populations will provide park managers with information needed to fulfill statutory mandates to maintain
biological diversity.



Cosandey-Godin, Aurelie (Dalhousie University); Worm, Boris (Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada)

Analysing Elasmobranch Bycatch Patterns in Arctic Canadian Waters

The Arctic is one of the last ocean wilderness areas in the world. However, with sea ice coverage
decreasing, previously inaccessible areas are increasingly being exploited by commercial fisheries. In
Baffin Bay, fisheries targeting Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides) and northern shrimp
(Pandalus borealis) have been expending since mid-1990s. There is a clear commitment from the
Canadian federal government to further increase fishing operation in the western and eastern Arctic
areas. Fisheries bycatch is a main cause of population declines in several species of sharksand skates
around the world. To date, no research has investigated elasmobranch bycatch patterns in the Arctic
region. At-sea observer data from fisheries operating offshore the Nunavut Territory ( Northwest Atlantic
Fisheries Organization (NAFO) subarea 0) from 1995-2011 have been combined for all elasmobranch
species. We used spatial point pattern methods, a novel way to analyse bycatch hotspot to enhance our
understanding of the factor driving these catch patterns. Data were split into different seasons and
species groups to investigate variations at these different scales. Otter trawl, twin trawl, and gillnet
targeting Greenland halibut are contributing to the largest catch of elasmobranch. In term of weight (kg),



                                                                                                       148
the most common species encountered are Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus), Arctic skate
(Amblyraja hyperborea), thorny skate (Amblyraja radiata), and the shorttail or Jensen's skate (Amblyraja
jenseni). This study provides the first complete perspective of fisheries bycatch for elasmobranch in
Eastern Arctic waters and highlights specific region–fleet combinations that require scientific scrutiny and
conservation measures.



Cosandey-Godin, Aurelie (Dalhousie University); Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS,
Canada); John H., Wang (NOAA-Kewalo Research Facility, Honolulu, HI, United States); Worm, Boris
(Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada)

No Effect from Rare-Earth Metal Deterrent on Shark Bycatch in a Commercial Pelagic Longline
Trial

The indiscriminate capture of non-target organisms (bycatch) in commercial fisheries is an issue of critical
concern to the sustainable development and conservation of marine resources. In the Northwest Atlantic,
blue sharks ( Prionace glauca ) comprise a significant proportion of unwanted bycatch in the Canadian
pelagic longline fleet targeting swordfish and occasionally tuna. Minimizing the capture of these species is
of interest to the industry as well as conservation organizations. Several shark species have been shown
to be repulsed by the magnetic field generated by rare-earth magnets. For this reason, magnetic
deterrents have become a promising bycatch solution on pelagic longlines, but controlled trials under
commercial fishing conditions are still lacking. In collaboration with the longline industry, a total of 7 sets
(6300 hooks) with three hook treatments: standard hooks, hooks equipped with rare-earth alloys (Nd/Pr),
and hooks with lead weights were deployed in 2011 on the outer scotia Shelf, Nova Scotia. Results
suggest that rare-earth metals do not have any significant deterrent effect on the most common shark
bycatch species (blue, mako, and porbeagle) and as such are not a practical bycatch mitigation option in
the Canadian fishery. The inclusion of all stakeholders in this study has proven valuable in improving the
methodology by operating under realistic commercial-scale conditions; we believe that this is an effective
way to conduct bycatch research at a regional level.



Costello, Jennifer (CUNY Graduate Center); Department of Biology, CUNY College of Staten Island,
2800 Victory Blvd, Staten Island NY 10314

Frogs as Biological Indicators: Does Habitat Degradation Impact Prey Capture Efficiency?

 Anthropogenic disturbances to freshwater ecosystems are intensifying with the continued growth and
expansion of the human population. Rapid identification of species or habitats most vulnerable to
disturbance is therefore important for conservation. Biological indicators are species whose condition
correlates with that of other taxa in the same location. This allows for observation of proxy organisms to
reflect or even predict the condition of others sharing the same habitat. Common pollutants in these
degraded habitats are organics, heavy metals, and insecticides. Heavy metals, particularly, are of great
concern due to their persistence in the environment. By monitoring a species recognized as a biological
indicator, early detection of adverse responses to these hazardous conditions may be possible. Recently,
frogs have been proposed as biological indicators due to the unique nature of the amphibian life cycle.
Identification of sub-lethal effects of habitat degradation through monitoring several levels of biological
organization in a species recognized as a biological indicator may allow for early detection of threats.
Numerous studies attribute responses at single biological levels to environmental pollutants; however few
studies have established links between these biological levels. The results of this research will establish



                                                                                                           149
1) which levels of biological organization are influenced by habitat degradation and 2) if a link exists
between lower levels of biological organization, such as cellular abnormalities and metal accumulation,
and upper levels of biological organization, such as feeding behavior and population composition. This
study not only provides an understanding of the impact of degraded habitats on Green frog, Lithobates
clamitans populations and identifies the processes by which these changes are occurring, but also
forecasts changes in other organisms that share the same habitat.



Cotten, Taylor (Arizona Game and Fish Department); Grandmaison, David (Arizona Game and Fish
Department, Canada)

Distribution and Habitat Use of the Lowland Leopard Frog in the Greater Lower Colorado River
Ecosystem

The Lower Colorado River Multi-Species Conservation Program (LCR MSCP) was implemented by the
US Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) in 2005. This multi-stakeholder program satisfies a US Fish and
Wildlife Service Biological Opinion that necessitated the conservation of 31 species of fish and wildlife in
order for river operations to continue along the Colorado River from Lake Mead south to the        Mexico
border. The list includes the lowland leopard frog ( Lithobates yavapaiensis ). The lowland leopard frog
has not been documented along the Colorado River south of the Grand Canyon in over 20 years. The
Arizona Game and Fish Department through a cooperative agreement with USBR began conducting
surveys to determine the distribution of the species along the LCR in January 2011. Methods used to
detect amphibians included visual encounter and auditory surveys as well as larval funnel traps and dip
net surveys. Within three days of sampling, we characterized the habitat within a 10m radius of all sites
where lowland leopard frogs were encountered and randomly sub-sampled locations within the same
local riparian system where the target species was not found. In addition we sampled randomly selected
sites from the entire study area (the length of the LCR). Habitat characteristics measured included
vegetation and substrate type, water temperature, water depth, turbidity, pH, and stream discharge.
Preliminary results will be provided.



Cotton, Charles (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University, Canada)

Biology of Deep-water Chondrichthyans: Introduction

Approximately half of the known chondrichthyans, nearly 600 species, live in the deep ocean (below 200
m), yet little is known of the biology or life history of most of these fishes. The limited information about
deep-water chondrichthyans is often confounded by uncertainty in the taxonomy and systematics of these
taxa and new species are frequently described. Research is also hindered because many species are
known from few specimens of only the type material. The need for more research and dissemination of
information about deep-water chondrichthyans has become more urgent as fisheries worldwide expand
deeper. Until recently, much of the fishing effort on deep-water chondrichthyans was localized and often
artisanal. However, contemporary fishing effort for deep-water sharks has been increasing worldwide, in
spite of considerable data indicating that deep-water fishes have among the slowest of vertebrate life
histories (slower growth, delayed maturity, lower fecundity). K -selected life histories render these deep-
water species susceptible to overexploitation and localized depletion, yet most exploitation occurs in the
absence of the species-specific life history or biological information needed to develop management
plans.      This symposium will provide a forum for the dissemination of the extensive volume of new
information available on this unique group of fishes, including data that may inform management plans



                                                                                                         150
and conservation efforts. It will also facilitate the formation of networks of deep-water chondrichthyan
researchers working within the sub-disciplines of taxonomy, telemetry, feeding and trophic dynamics, age
and growth, biogeography, physiology, reproductive biology, and population genetics.



Cotton, Charles (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University Coastal
and Marine Laboratory, St. Teresa, FL, United States); Musick, John (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Reproduction and embryonic development in two species of North Atlantic squaliform sharks,
Centrophorus cf. niaukang and Etmopterus princeps: evidence of matrotrophy?

Chondrichthyans ovulate much larger eggs and undergo a more protracted embryonic development than
bony fishes.      As a result, some organic matter originally present in the chondrichthyan egg yolk is
depleted via metabolic excretion over the course of embryogenesis. Previous studies have suggested
that the energetic toll of embryogenesis in lecithotrophic species depletes organic matter in the egg by
more than 20% during embryonic development. Conversely, organic matter in developing embryos of
matrotrophic species is augmented by various forms of maternal nourishment, resulting in organic matter
depletion of less than 20% during embryogenesis. We compared the mass of organic material in freshly
fertilized eggs to that of near-term embryos to investigate the maternal-embryonic nutritional relationships
of Centrophorus cf. niaukang and Etmopterus princeps collected from the North Atlantic.
Measurements of ash-free dry weights of a series of embryos revealed that some form of maternal
nutrient contribution, likely mucoid histotrophy, occurs in at least one species. Centrophorus cf. niaukang
embryos undergo a reduction of 19.5% in organic matter, while E. princeps embryos undergo a
reduction of 7.8% in organic matter over the course of embryonic development. Uterine villi were present
in both species and became larger and increasingly vascularized over the course of gestation. Though
previous studies have suggested a strictly respiratory and ionic exchange function in similar species, the
aggregate role of these uterine villi is not fully understood and they likely produce mucoid histotroph in the
species we examined.          Embryos of C . cf. niaukang were also dissected in order to track the
partitioning of water, organic matter, and inorganic matter to the liver, external yolk sac, internal yolk sac,
digestive tract, and eviscerated body, throughout development. Observed fecundity and maturity ogives
are also presented along with comments on the apparent aseasonality of mating and the ovarian cycle of
each species. Likewise, we present the observed patterns of segregation by sex and reproductive stage
for each species. Our results are compared with previous studies of reproductive biology and maternal-
embryonic nutritional relationships of other chondrichthyans.



Craig, Michael (Murdoch University and University of Western Australia); Hardy, Giles (Murdoch
University, Canada); Grigg, Andrew (Alcoa of Australia, Canada); Hobbs, Richard (University of Western
Australia, Canada)

Improving habitat quality of restored forests for reptiles: Lessons from an Australian eucalypt
forest

Restoration, through its potential to reduce the negative effects of habitat fragmentation, is becoming
increasingly important in saving global biodiversity. However, evidence is increasing that passive faunal
recolonization of restored areas may take centuries for some species, subsequently reducing, or
negating, any restoration benefits for those species. Reptiles have been identified as typically the slowest
vertebrate group to recolonize restored areas due to their low vagility and, often, specific thermal and




                                                                                                           151
microhabitat requirements, but relatively few studies have examined their recolonization of restored
areas. We examined reptile recolonization patterns in pits restored after bauxite mining in eucalypt forests
in south-western Australia to identify filters that slow, or prevent, reptile return and identify practices that
reduce the effect of these filters. Three species, the skinks Cryptoblepharus buchananii and Egernia
napoleonis and the gecko Christinus marmoratus were slow, or failed, to recolonize restored mine-pits. All
rely on slow developing microhabitats (e.g. coarse woody debris and tree hollows) for shelter so the
absence, or scarcity, of these microhabitats in restored forest is likely the unidirectional filter slowing their
recolonization. Our work on E. napoleonis suggest that coarse woody debris densities need to be much
                      -1                                                        -1
higher ( ~ 50 logs ha ) than current restoration prescriptions (1 log pile ha ) to accelerate recolonization
by that species. Another skink, Morethia obscura, was common in unmined forest and rapidly recolonized
restored areas but disappeared as restored areas matured. Thinning and burning was an effective
management strategy to facilitate recolonization by this species but its effects were short-term (<7 years),
indicating that overdense vegetation structure is a dynamic filter that influences recolonization by this
species, probably due to thermal requirements. Our study shows active management of restored areas to
facilitate and accelerate faunal recolonization is required for some species, to maximise biodiversity
benefits from restoration. Provision of coarse woody debris and planting species at densities that will
approximate the structure of reference communities are two strategies likely to facilitate faunal
recolonization in many forested ecosystems. Techniques to accelerate the formation of slow-developing
microhabitats are poorly developed and are an important area for future research.



Crawford, Andrew J. (Universidad de los Andes); Ibáñez, Roberto (Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute, Canada); Lips, Karen R. (Universidad de Maryland, Canada); Paz, Andrea (Universidad de los
Andes, Canada); Driskell, Amy (Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

Cryptic diversity and diversification in the amphibian fauna of Panama

The Lissamphibia is a diverse and still poorly known group of vertebrates in which the annual number
(and possibly the rate) of new species descriptions is still increasing. Their poorly characterized diversity
and increasing conservation concern, combined with their typically large interspecific genetic divergences
make amphibians an excellent focal group for a high-throughput molecular inventory. Here we present a
survey of intra- and interspecific mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence variation involving 113 named
species of amphibians representing 45 genera and 14 families within the Republic of Panama. We
sequenced a portion of the 16S gene along with the Folmer fragment of COI for 1,500 Panamanian
samples, and applied a variety of DNA barcoding algorithms to these data to estimate numbers of
unconfirmed candidate species. No cryptic diversity was observed in families such as Bufonidae,
Centrolenidae or Microhylidae. Candidate species were uncovered in families such as Ranidae and
Dendrobatidae, with particularly high cryptic diversity in Terrarana. Among the 113 species surveyed
here, the mtDNA data may support an estimated 170 primary species hypotheses, or a 51% increase in
amphibian species diversity for Panama. We also compared inferences based one versus two genes,
compared methods to estimate numbers of undescribed species, and discuss implications for ex situ
management and other efforts towards the conservation of tropical amphibian diversity.




                                                                                                             152
Crawford, Andrew J. (Universidad de los Andes); Muñoz, Astrid (Universidad de los Andes, Canada);
Guarnizo, Carlos (Universidad de la Salle, Canada); Paz, Andrea; Flechas, Sandra V. (Universidad de los
Andes, Canada)

DNA barcoding survey of amphibians across the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia

Colombia hosts the second highest amphibian species diversity, yet this fauna remains little studied,
especially using molecular genetic techniques. We present the results of the first DNA barcoding survey
of amphibians of Colombia, focusing on a single transect across the Eastern Andes. We surveyed 8 sites
between the Magdalena river valley to the west and the Llanos to the east. We sequenced a portion of
the 16S and COI genes for each of >200 samples from 53 named species and applied a variety DNA
barcoding algorithms to estimate levels of cryptic diversity. Levels of intra-specific diversity were highest
in the lowland genera, Scinax and Leptodactylus , particularly along the eastern foothills of the eastern
Andes, suggesting that this region requires further exploration and its fauna more systematic work. In
total we found six potential candidate species. This number is lower than expected, perhaps due to the
limited geographic coverage within Colombia, or the limited amount of geographic sampling within
species. In the future we hope to expand this work nationally, as well as combine this information with
similar DNA barcode data from neighboring countries to obtain a regional perspective on the levels and
distribution of cryptic amphibian diversity.



Crawford, Nicholas (Boston University); Losos, Jonathan; Hoekstra, Hopi (Harvard University, Canada);
Schneider, Christopher (Boston University, Canada)

The genetics of colorful pigmentation in Anolis lizards

Colorful pigmentation, the production of greens, blues, reds, and oranges, is important in social signaling,
sexual selection and speciation. Despite its evolutionary importance little is known about its genetic basis.
An ideal system in which to study colorful pigments would have extensive intra and interspecific variation
in colorful traits, a well-resolved phylogeny, and genomic resources. Anolis lizards are such a system.
Anoles have a colorful signaling organ, an extensible gular fold called a dewlap, which they use in intra
and interspecific displays. Anoles are the most specious terrestrial vertebrate with over 400 described
species. In addition, anoles have both a sequenced genome and a well-resolved phylogeny. Our research
uses both whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (RNA-seq) along with genome wide association
methods to investigate the genes and genomic regions involved in producing colorful pigmentation. We
have sequenced 24 RNA-seq libraries from the green anole ( Anolis carolinensis ), which we are using to
disentangle the genetic pathways involved in producing pink and 'green' pigments. We have also
sequenced the complete genomes from two phenotypically divergent populations of the leopard anole (
Anolis marmoratus ). Leopard anoles are unusual among anoles because they display a substantial
amount of variation in coloration despite a high level of geneflow between populations. Thus these
genomic sequences have allowed us to identify regions that are segregating based on phenotype in the
two populations. Together these studies lay the groundwork for a detailed analysis of the genetics of
pigmentation involved in the adaptive radiation of anolis lizards. Furthermore this work will lead to a
greater understanding of colorful pigmentation because our preliminary analyses have implicated genetic
pathways that are likely responsible for the production and evolution of colorful pigmentation in many
vertebrates.




                                                                                                         153
Cree, Alison (University of Otago); Besson, Anne (University of Otago, Canada); Baillie, Chris (Orokonui
Ecosanctuary, Canada); Dolia, Jigu (University of Otago, Canada)

Reintroduction of tuatara to a South Island eco-sanctuary in New Zealand: biological and cultural
considerations

Translocations of organisms for conservation purposes often involve species limited to relict distributions.
However, such proposals raise questions about the ability of individuals from source populations to
acclimatize and breed once shifted to distant locations. Several conservation-based translocations of
tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus ) have occurred since 1995 with positive indicators of success, but all are
within the current (northern) geographic range, representing less than 50% of the former latitudinal
distribution. For the past six years, we have been exploring the potential translocation of tuatara to
Orokonui Ecosanctuary. This fenced 307-hectare eco-sanctuary in the southern South Island is close to
sites of former occupation by tuatara but over 600 km south of the likely source population. Our approach
has employed eco-physiological studies with lab-housed or outdoor, captive-housed animals to assess
probable effects of cooler temperatures on behaviour, growth and survival, as well as field studies of the
effects of available soil temperatures on egg incubation success and sex ratios. Results from this
exploratory approach have helped in obtaining support from conservation authorities and from Maori
tribes (iwi), who represent guardians (kaitiaki) of the source population and those with tribal land authority
(mana whenua) for the destination. Planned translocations to Orokonui from 2011 will help meet the
restoration, advocacy and iwi-engagement goals of the Tuatara Recovery Plan, and also offer some
insurance from future climate change in a warming world.



Creemers, Raymond (RAVON);

Mobilising your volunteers: reliability of collected data and key sucess factors in citizen science

Collecting data with the help of volunteers has a long historical tradition. Reliability of these data has
proven to be very high and validation procedures improve both with increasing numbers of data and with
education of volunteers. Motivating volunteers end stimulating data collection by volunteers is carried out
through a variety of different projects, for experienced volunteers but also for the genaral public. These
projects include online recording and monitoring schemes, mapping projects, a portal for toad patrols and
large-scale chytrid swabbing or early warning systems for exotic species and diseases. The key succes
factors for these citizen science projects are identified and the benefits of working with volunteers for
conservation are discussed.



Crespi, Erica J. (Washington State University, School of Biological Sciences); Denver, Robert (University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States)

Developmental plasticity and long term phenotypic consequences of early life stress in
amphibians: Implications for breeding programs

Developmental plasticity is the property of a given genotype to produce different phenotypes in response
to environmental conditions experienced during development. Amphibian larvae have immense capacity
for developmental plasticity. Environmental conditions experienced during the larval stage affect larval
behavior, morphology, the timing of metamorphosis, and can lead to variation in adult phenotypic
expression. The timing of metamorphosis is controlled by the neuropeptide corticotropin-releasing factor
(CRF), which induces the secretion of corticosteroids, stress hormones associated with the hypothalamo-



                                                                                                          154
pituitary-interrenal (HPI) axis, and the secretion of thyroid hormone, the primary morphogen controlling
metamorphosis. While production of stress hormones may favor survival in a deteriorating larval habitat,
costs may be incurred such as reduced tadpole growth and size at metamorphosis. Elevated stress
hormones during the larval stage can lead to long term effects on physiology and behavior of the juvenile
adult, effects mediated by corticosteroids acting to ‗program‘ gene expression. Exposure to stressful
environmental conditions or experimental elevation of plasma corticosterone (CORT) slows tadpole
growth. However, after metamorphosis stressed or CORT-treated animals show catch-up growth,
reaching similar body size to controls as juvenile frogs, related to altered function of the HPI axis. This is
in part due to hyperphagia, and perhaps also to altered metabolism in CORT-treated animals, and is
associated with altered CRF expression in the brain. However, post-metamorphic effects of stressful
environmental conditions during the tadpole phase are condition-dependent. Such effects of the early
environment, mediated by altered CRF expression and CORT levels, may have important consequences
for survival and reproduction of captive amphibians.

(Supported by NSF grants IBN 0235401 and IOS 0922583.)



Crnobrnja-Isailovic, Jelka (Faculty of Sciences and Mathematics University of Ni¿); Paunovic, Momir
(Institute for biological research "sinisa Stankovic" University of Beograd, Beograd, Serbia)

Amphibians in transition: a case study from Southeastern Europe

In most of Palearctic countries ranked as rich in amphibian diversity the global threats to amphibian
populations are prominent. The foremost factors are loss, degradation and fragmentation of habitat,
followed by pollution, competition from invasive non-native species (Sommerwerk et al. 2009), increased
predatory pressure from domestic animals, and emerging infectious diseases. In combination with
economic and political transition, these effects could lead to local extirpation of important fragments of
European amphibian diversity. Regarding amphibian species richness, Republic of Serbia is one of top
20 countries in Palearctic region. However, with t he country moving toward market economy, a new
problem arose – responsibility for environment protection within the context of a process of privatization.
Lack of wastewater management plan, uncontrolled long-term population of watercourses with
allochtonous invasive fish species, roadkill and illegal collection for commercial purposes influenced
negatively on local amphibian populations. Additional and perhaps specific threat for local amphibian
assemblages is disappearance of small and moderate water bodies, primarily in the highlands, either
through backfilling or turning into fish ponds. Most of efforts concerning aquatic habitat conservation in
the country are focused on bird and fish species (ICPDR National Report 2005) and the protection of
specific habitats important for the conservation of amphibians are not adequately addressed. Although
the general protection of inland water habitats and wetlands contributes to the conservation of
amphibians, the specific small-sized habitats of particular importance for amphibians should be identified
and protected. Analysis of surveys related to identification, mapping and classification of amphibian
important habitats showed apparent degree of their fragility and thus further work in this matter should be
carried out in order to propose and implement adequate conservation measures. The monitoring of
amphibians is not widespread in the area and must be intensified, together with proper and frequent
education about the importance of amphibian conservation, not just through ordinary educational
programmes but among citizens in general. Recent history and current problems with political transitions
make biodiversity conservation even more difficult than before, and present economic pressures mean
that, without direct economic incentive, the people of the area will not be motivated to preserve
amphibians‘ breeding sites.




                                                                                                          155
Crosby, Jonquil (University of Waterloo); Ashpole, Sara; Murphy, Stephen (University of Waterloo,
Canada); Persello, Brent (British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure, Canada)

Investigating road permeability strategies and amphibian movement within British Columbia’s
South Okanagan: a landscape level approach

Increased traffic and road expansion likely exacerbates barriers to amphibian migration and dispersal.
Within British Columbia‘s south Okanagan valley there is particular concern that the COSEWIC-listed
blotched tiger salamander ( Ambystoma mavortium melanostictum ) and Great Basin spadefoot ( Spea
intermontana ) are vulnerable to road effects in their annual movements from upland overwintering habitat
to lowland breeding areas. Our study utilizes a landscape level approach to assess amphibian movement
and population threats across this highway-bisected landscape.

During spring and summer 2010 and 2011, fifty kilometers of roadways (including 33 km of highway) were
repeatedly surveyed within the south Okanagan valley. Surveys were carried out utilising vehicles,
bicycles, and on foot. Sections of the survey area were classified into primary and secondary survey
routes whereby the primary survey route is a three kilometer highway passing lane located adjacent to a
floodplain. In 2011, the four-lane highway was constructed parallel to the original two-lane highway
creating a six lane obstacle for migration and dispersal. Survey effort was greater throughout the primary
route compared to the secondary route to ensure rigorous data collection for use in roadkill mitigation
strategies.

Amphibian road occurrence data and landscape variables from our 2010 field season represent pre-
highway expansion road activity (232 survey hours recorded 1385 mortalities from 2022 amphibian road
occurrences). Four species of amphibians were found on the roads surveyed: Pacific chorus frog (
Pseudacris regilla ), Western toad ( Anaxyrus boreas ) plus the aforementioned blotched tiger
salamander and Great Basin spadefoot.

In 2011, road mortality mitigation plans were incorporated through strategic culvert placement and interior
substrate enhancement, combined with polymer drift fencing to guide herpetiles beneath the roadway.
Continued research on post-construction roadway effects on amphibians, monitored use of culverts
through camera traps, priority wetland surveys, and species movement data commenced in 2011 with the
passing lanes in use. Mark-recapture using visual implant elastomer was performed on Great Basin
spadefoot observed within the primary area. The species data collected in 2011 represents post-road
construction activity. Seven hundred and eight mortalities were recorded from 1592 amphibian road
occurrences in 2011 over 264 road survey hours.

Mitigation structure usage was observed through combined infrared and time lapse photography within
three culverts, in addition to roadway occurrence surveys. Three species of amphibian were shown to use
the culverts with the camera traps: tiger salamander, Great Basin spadefoot, Pacific chorus frog; in
addition, one snake species, four mammal species, three bird species and a variety of invertebrates
occurred within the photos. Camera traps were in operation from early May to mid July, 2012.

This study maintains a greater landscape level approach with the inclusion of opportunistic road data
collection from multiple sources over the years, as well as long-term breeding pond monitoring throughout
the study areas. Habitat assessment throughout the adjacent landscapes has given a greater knowledge
of the migrational corridors and substrate types that the amphibians are travelling through.

Studies will be replicated through spring and summer 2012 for a final post construction field season.
Mitigation structures and modifications were incomplete during the beginning of the 2011 spring adult




                                                                                                       156
migration, and will need to be investigated in 2012 to capture the mitigation effectiveness with a full
season migration.



Crother, Brian (Southeastern Louisiana University); White, Mary (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Hammond, United States); Johnson, Andrew (University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom)

Primordial Germ Cell Development in Amphibians and Reptiles: Mechanisms and Evolution

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) are the precursor cells of the eventual germ cells, eggs and sperm. Two
distinct mechanisms are known for most of life and amphibians and reptiles exhibit both. The
predetermined mechanism is so called because the cells that develop in the presence of particular
molecules (often called germ plasm) automatically develop into PGCs. Frogs and snakes are thought to
share this mechanism. The other mechanism is called induced and in this process the PGCs are formed
much later in development in response to a cascade of inducing signals. Salamanders, turtles, and at
least some lizards are considered to exhibit this mode of PGC determination. Across life and across
amniotes, the predetermined mechanism is hypothesized to be convergently derived in several lineages
whereas the induced mechanism is plesiomorphic. Details of the evolutionary process will be discussed.



Crow, Karen (San Francisco State University);

Molecular evolution of Hox genes after whole genome duplication in a basal ray-finned fish, and
surprising patterns of Hox expression in various body plan features at later stages of
development

Vertebrates have experienced several rounds of whole genome duplication in the stem lineages of deep
nodes within the group, and a subsequent event in the stem lineage of the teleosts-a diverse group of
ray-finned fishes. Based on the first full Hox gene sequences for any member of the Acipenseriformes,
the American paddlefish, we confirm that an independent whole genome duplication occurred in the
paddlefish lineage approximately 42 million years ago. We obtained sequences spanning the entire HoxA
cluster and six genes on the HoxD gene cluster. These clusters are located on different chromosomes,
and maintain conserved synteny relative to bichir, zebrafish, stickleback and pufferfish, as well as human,
mouse, and chick. We also provide a gene genealogy for the duplicated fzd8 gene in paddlefish. Taken
together, we clarify that the American paddlefish has a duplicated genome and highlight implications on
comparative analyses in the study of the ―fin-limb transition‖, as well as gene and genome duplication in
bony fishes. There were interesting trends in the molecular evolution of the alpha and beta paralog
clusters for both the HoxA and HoxD genes. The posterior Hox genes, or 5‘ genes that share homology
with the Drosophila Abd-B gene, are expressed during pectoral fin and limb development. And we found
interesting patterns of expression for these same genes in various body plan features at later stages of
development, that have not been previously described.



Crozier, Lisa (NOAA Fisheries);

Projecting plastic and evolutionary responses to climate change in salmon migration timing

Persistence of the anadromous, semelparous life history characteristic of most Pacific salmon depends
crucially on high adult survival during the spawning migration. Decades of overfishing and competing



                                                                                                       157
anthropogenic water and land uses have lowered salmon survival and reproduction dramatically, to the
point where many populations are now on the verge of extinction. Climate change presents an
accelerating pressure capable of lowering adult migrant survival in regions where water temperatures
already approach stressful levels. However, over the 20th century salmon have responded to rising water
temperatures by shifting their migration timing. I present a model that estimates the evolutionary and
plastic (non-genetic) processes that best explain the historical timing shift observed in Columbia River
sockeye salmon. I then run the model prospectively under climate change scenarios to explore potential
limits to this adaptive response.



Cullimore, Peterson (University of Michigan--Flint);

Comparative phylogenetics of an isolated population of Desmognathus fuscus in Murphy Lake
State Game Area (Millington, Michigan)

Plethodontidae is the largest family of salamanders, exhibiting great diversity of natural history, and
reaching maximum species richness in the Eastern United States throughout the Southern Appalachian
Mountains region. There is much confusion and debate regarding the status of species placed within
genus Desmognathus , a common issue among plethodontid genera. Their widespread distribution and
altitudinal separation have resulted in several populations that exhibit increased genetic variation. In
2008, researchers discovered an isolated population of Desmognathus salamanders at Murphy Lake
State Game Area in Southeastern Michigan. As the nearest population is reported in north central Ohio,
approximately 500 km away, the origin of this population is in question. We amplified a 648-bp fragment
of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (CO1) gene obtained from individuals collected from the Michigan
population and compared it with CO1 gene sequences from individuals collected across the species‘
distribution and from published data. Sequence data will help us to determine if the Michigan population‘s
origin was due to a recent human introduction, if it was the result of a dispersal event, or if it is a relict
population left over from Pleistocene glaciations when the range of D. fuscus was divided by glacial
advances.



Cummings, Molly (University of Texas);

Sexual selection and color polymorphisms in poison frogs: the male and female perspective

It is commonly assumed that natural selection imposed by predators is the dominant force driving the
evolution and maintenance of aposematic traits.            In the polymorphic Panamanian Bocas del Toro
populations of Dendrobates pumilio (the strawberry dart frog), analyses of dorsal conspicuousness and
toxicity reveal the strongest predictive relationship for a specific predator viewer (birds) over a conspecific
viewer. However, behavioral examinations within these populations reveal that both female and male
viewers respond non-randomly to males of differing brightness and color. Both males and females of
the Solarte population show stronger behavioral responses toward brighter males in manipulation studies
in the lab. Furthermore, our spectral reflectance measurements identifying sexual dimorphism in dorsal
brightness in this population suggests that inter- and intra-sexual selection may be playing a significant
role in the evolution of this aposematic signal.        Taken together, our studies suggest that a triad of
viewers (predators, rivals and potential mates) contribute to the evolutionary trajectory of aposematic
color evolution.




                                                                                                           158
Cunningham, Michael (South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity); Bloomer, Paulette (University of
Pretoria, Hatfield, South Africa)

Comparative Phylogeography of the Cape Fold and Maluti-Drakensberg Herpetofauna, Southern
Africa

Two complementary montane hotspots of endemism occur at the southern end of Africa. In the south and
south-west the Cape Fold Mountains form parallel series of craggy sandstone ranges along the coast,
dissected by rivers running from inland. The Maluti-Drakensberg highlands, in the south-east interior, is
an extensive basalt plateau, deeply incised by rivers flowing east and west of the continental watershed.
Each region hosts a suite of endemic frog and lizard species, many with sister lineages in the alternate
region. Contrasting opportunities for dispersal have resulted in distinct patterns of species diversity and
local endemism in each of these regions. Here we present a comparative phylogeographic analysis of
diversity and divergence within endemic montane species of Hadromophryne, Heleophryne,
Strongylopus, Vandijkophrynus, Tropidosaura, Hemicordylus and Pseudocordylus. Species in the Cape
Fold Mountains show concordant patterns of Plio-Pleistocene vicariance into 4-5 subregional lineages.
Species in the Maluti-Drakensberg show less concordance, with fewer subregional splits, but where they
exist, older divergences between northern and southern lineages. We explore the likely consequences of
climate change for phylogeographic diversity in each region using spatial modelling of lineage
distributions.



Cupp, Paul (Eastern Kentucky University);

Evidence of social monogamy in green salamanders, Aneides aeneus

Social monogamy is indicated where males remain near females before and after egg deposition thus
reducing chances for multiple paternity. During a study of brooding behavior in female green
salamanders, Aneides aeneus , some evidence of social monogamy was noted. Some males (n=7) were
found in rock crevices adjacent to crevices where females were brooding eggs. The same males were in
these crevices in subsequent visits, suggesting the possibility of being the paternal males. Outside the
brooding period, these males were sometimes found in breeding crevices. Males were usually found near
just one nest site. However, in one rock crevice subdivided into smaller crevices, a male occupied a
crevice just behind and between two narrow crevices where two females brooded eggs. Over seven
years, this male was often present and apparently in position to aid in defense of both nest sites. Young
were usually produced successfully in both nest sites each year. In another instance, a male identified by
the pattern of spots on the head was found in a crevice adjacent to a brooding female. Over a 10-year
period, this same male was found in either an adjacent crevice or the breeding crevice. During this time,
females successfully brooded eggs in the breeding crevice each year. Also, in three instances, new
hatchlings were observed in the same crevices with apparent paternal males over several days. One or
two hatchlings were observed on the tail of a male or behind his body. Although only females brood eggs
in many crevices, these observations suggest that male A . aeneus may have a role in defense of some
nest sites. Because male A. aeneus arrive at breeding crevices in late spring prior to females and are
aggressive in maintaining territories where pairing and mating may occur, they have a considerable
investment to protect. This is the first evidence of male A. aeneus associated with and possibly
protecting nest sites, and suggests social monogamy may occur in this species.




                                                                                                       159
da Silva, Jessica (South African National Biodiversity Institute); Tolley, Krystal (South African National
Biodiversity Institute, Cape Town, South Africa)

Phenotypic divergence and recent radiation in dwarf chameleons: Adaptation to habitat or
widespread speciation?

Dwarf chameleons (Bradypodion) are thought to have adaptively radiated into different habitats, but the
mode of these radiations is not well understood. In the present study, we examined the correspondence
between genetic and morphological variation in a clade of Bradypodion from KwaZulu-Natal Province,
South Africa. The clade is comprised of two species - B. thamnobates and B. melanocephalum; however,
overall appearance (e.g. colour, size, shape) is extremely variable across the range, leading to
speculation that there are multiple ecomorphs. We used a combination of genetic (n=279, 10
microsatellite loci & one mitochondrial marker) and morphometric data (n=392, 24 measurements) to
examine the hypothesis that recent radiation into novel habitats is accompanied by morphological
changes for ecologically relevant characters. Because the radiation is recent (i.e. Pleistocene), we
expected a lack of genetic divergence at the species level.

A hierarchical clustering analysis revealed the presence of three morphological clusters (Bootstrap – AU:
95-100%; BP: 82-98%) corresponding to 1) B. melanocephalum, 2) B. thamnobates, and 3) a cluster off
which B. thamnobates branches. A multivariate analysis of the three clusters (PCA & MANOVA) using
size corrected residuals showed that B. melanocephalum has significantly smaller hands and feet, yet
generally longer limbs compared to the other two clusters, as well as a significantly smaller casque
compared to B. thamnobates and cluster 3 males. These morphological patterns correspond with those in
other Bradypodion clades, reflecting macro-habitat differences – B. melanocephalum occurs in
grasslands; whereas B. thamnobates and cluster 3 occur in forest fragments.

Bayesian clustering on the microsatellite data identified five populations (FCT = 0.371; p < 0.001) – B.
melanocephalum, a population corresponding to morphological cluster 3 (both matching the
morphological analysis), and three populations within B. thamnobates. Shared mitochondrial haplotypes
between most populations indicate a lack of divergence typically expected at the species level, and this
incomplete lineage sorting suggests that populations were formerly connected. The population genetic
structure within B. thamnobates could be representative of the dynamic environmental changes during
the Pleistocene that resulted in the regression of forests, creating isolated patches preventing gene flow
between populations. The genetic divergence was not accompanied by morphological divergence, as
these chameleons inhabit similar micro (perch size) and macro (forest) habitats, suggesting that
adaptations to the environment are retained despite suspension of gene flow. The strong morphological
divergence present in this group of chameleons does not reflect widespread speciation, but indicates that
chameleon morphology is highly labile and coupled to habitat.



Daley, Ross (CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric);

Home range and movement of Centrophorus zeehaani on the continental slope off South Australia
determined by acoustic telemetry

Expanding resource use has resulted in major population declines in at least ten species of deep-sea
dogsharks in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. Spatial management, including closures, has been
implemented to support recovery of two species off Australia. Transmitters with depth and pressure
sensors were fitted to Centrophorus zeehaani (n=70) to test key a key assumption underpinning closure
design: a proportion of individuals remain resident within the closure. Sharks were tracked using an array



                                                                                                       160
of 22 acoustic receivers moored on the seafloor of the upper continental slope (200–700 m). Most sharks
(n=52) survived to be detected more than 20 times by at least two receivers. A minority of sharks (n=18)
were never detected on the seafloor of the study area and two sharks died on the seafloor more than
three months after release. A clear diurnal pattern was evident with movements into shallow water at
night and returning to deeper water at dawn. Sharks ascended earlier in the day and descended later
during winter compared to summer. Observed temperature range was mainly restricted to 10–13ºC and
most likely translates into a narrow latitudinal range. Individual ranges along the slope (across longitude)
were contained within the closure but diurnal movements across the slope regularly took many sharks
outside the bathymetric range of the closure . The narrow temperature and bathymetric range make this
species vulnerable to localised impacts. We conclude that effective spatial management measures can
be designed for deep-sea shark species when movement patterns have been studied in detail and
management arrangements can adapt to new data. However, remoteness and isolation make design and
monitoring costs high and cumulative, depending on the number of species affected. Therefore we
recommend that development and management of deep-sea shark fisheries proceed more cautiously
than for the continental shelf.



Davidson, Carlos (San Francisco State University);

Evaluating the pesticide hypothesis for amphibian population declines: Evidence from landscapes
to laboratories

Pesticides exposure has long been proposed as a possible cause for global amphibian population
declines. While disease as emerged as the leading cause of declines, it is still unclear if environmental
factors such as contaminants may be cofactors contributing to increased amphibian susceptibility to
disease. Drawing on my published and in progress research as well as other published research, I
evaluate the evidence from field and laboratory studies that pesticides are playing a role in amphibian
population declines.



Davidson, Lindsay (Simon Fraser University); Dulvy, Nicholas (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Fordham, Sonja (Shark Advocates International, Canada)

How much of the world's shark fishing is sustainable?

Unregulated catches of sharks and rays (hereafter ―sharks‖) for their fins and meat are driving population
declines and elevating extinction risk. Demand for shark products has increased sharply since the 1980s
and remains strong, not only for shark fin, but also meat from previously undesirable species such as blue
shark. Implementation of        management measures to control this rapidly rising mortality have been
sluggish and existing restrictions lack consistency across species‘ ranges. Here we ask what proportion
of the world‘s chondrichthyan catch is likely to be sustainable. We make the pragmatic and to-be-tested
assumption that countries with adequate shark plans are fishing sustainably. In order to identify hotspots
of conservation action and requirement, we describe the nation-by-nation spatial distribution of
chondrichthyan biodiversity patterns, catch levels, shark fin exports, and strength of shark plan. We found
that less than half of the top 20 sharks fishing nations with the greatest reported catch have yet to
implement a shark plan, and a quarter have yet to implement some form of shark finning ban.
Moreover, hotspots of shark biodiversity occur in national waters with high fishing mortality of sharks and
low levels of shark fisheries management.




                                                                                                        161
Davies, Sarah J. (Centre for Invasion Biology, Dept. Botany & Zoology, Stellenbosch University);
Clusella-Trullas, Susana (Centre for Invasion biology, Dept. Botany & Zoology, Stellenbosch Unviersity,
Canada); McGeoch, Melodie A. (Centre for Invasion Biology, Department of Botany & Zoology and Cape
Research Centre, South African National Parks, Canada)

Painted into a corner: Physiological tolerance limits spread in a sub-tropical amphibian
Hyperolius marmoratus

The painted reed frog ( Hyperolius marmoratus Rapp), previously restricted to the summer rainfall
regions of southern Africa, has established multiple breeding populations across the south-western winter
rainfall region of South Africa. This range expansion occurred over a period of only twelve years following
their introduction in 1997/8. Painted reed frogs have colonised the Western Cape by virtue of the
presence of perennial farm dams, and appear to fill the role of ‗urban exploiters‘. Occupancy is limited by
summer aridity, low winter temperatures and the absence of fringing vegetation around water bodies. This
study, as well as evidence from mitochondrial DNA analyses, indicate that the distribution in the novel
range has considerable spatial structuring. We investigated the spatial pattern of spread and the
responses of thermal tolerance and resting metabolic rate to temperature acclimation in frogs from the
novel range. Critical thermal limits responded to acclimation to temperatures within the range of ambient
temperatures commonly encountered in the study area. However, frogs from sites with different invasion
histories showed distinct physiological responses to acclimation, suggesting that phenotypic plasticity or
adaptation have enabled this species to expand its range extra-limitally. The results are examined in
relation to the invasion history and known genetic and biogeographic structuring of these populations.



Davis, Brendal (Dalhousie University); Worm, Boris (Dalhousie University, Canada)

The International Plan of Action for Sharks: How does Canada¿s national plan measure up?

Various species of sharks, skates, and rays continue to decline, demonstrating a greater need for
effective conservation measures. In 1999 the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) developed
comprehensive guidelines in its International Plan of Action (IPOA- sharks ), which was followed by
corresponding national plans in some nations.        Here we examine progress under Canada‘s National
Plan of Action for Sharks (NPOA- sharks ), against its stated goals, against Australia‘s NPOA, and
against the original FAO guidelines. For comprehensiveness, we also evaluate additional management
and conservation measures for sharks, as well as stakeholder input from the first Atlantic Shark Forum.
Although Canada is recognized as a leader in shark management, it has largely failed to effectively adopt
the FAOs principles and guidelines. The plan notably lacks set timelines, priorities, or action plans to
mitigate threats to sharks, and contains no performance indicators. Additionally, the plan neglects to
identify priority species, or engage stakeholders, and cannot be linked directly to management measures.
To advance the revision of this plan (as well as other NPOAs), we recommend a stepwise process that
includes (i) stakeholder engagement and development of a shark assessment report (SAR) (ii)
addressing of all IPOA objectives, while prioritizing issues arising from the SAR (iii) implementations of
actions, targets, and timelines that are reviewed every four years. We also suggest key policy items to
advance Canada‘s role in shark conservation and management at the national and regional level. These
include actions to improve data collection and research, management, education, as well as coordination
with stakeholders. If Canada aims to improve shark management and conservation, major changes are
needed to the existing NPOA. Likewise, the abovementioned measures may help guide more proactive
plans in nations that have not yet established an NPOA.




                                                                                                        162
Davis, Mark (Illinois Natural History Survey); Collyer, Michael (Western Kentucky University, Bowling
Green, KY, United States); Douglas, Marlis; Douglas, Michael (Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, United States)

Morphometrics, Molecules, and Ecology Define the Evolutionary History of the Western
Rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis) Complex

The biodiversity crisis has emphasized the necessity for an accurate delineation of biodiversity, which (in
turn) distills down to defining species. Concept-based approaches have long been contentious, and
remain so today. Additionally, rigid, deterministic species-concepts work against the fluidity of speciation
itself. Bridging this gap is thus an imperative if indeed biodiversity is to be measured. The Western
Rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis) Complex provides a unique opportunity to explore these issues through a
comprehensive assessment of its historically enigmatic evolution. Three disparate datasets (molecular,
geometric morphometric, and ecological) were compiled and analyzed in an effort to disentangle
relationships. Bayesian analysis of concatenated mtDNA revealed a single, well supported phylogenetic
hypothesis for the Western Rattlesnake complex composed of two well-established lineages and well-
supported relationships among subspecies. Assessment of head shape revealed that while subspecies
differ significantly in shape, inferential resolution regarding the evolutionary relationships are clouded by
confounding factors. Finally, subspecies exhibit differential ecological proclivities, suggesting possible
ecological speciation and shedding light on the influence of ecology on morphological differentiation.
Finally, these three datasets were coalesced using supertree methodology to derive a unified hypothesis
of Western Rattlesnake intrarelationships. Results supported two distinct lineages within the Western
Rattlesnake complex, yet subspecific relationships remain, in part, obscured.



Davis, Matthew (The Field Museum); Smith, Wm. Leo (The Field Museum, Canada)

The Evolution of Bioluminescence and its Impact on Diversification in Deep-Sea Lineages

Deep-sea fishes are subject to similar selective pressures due to extreme environmental conditions (e.g.,
darkness, high atmospheric pressure); thus, convergent adaptations are extremely common. Additionally,
while nearly one third of marine fishes are known to exist at depths below 200m, little is known about the
macroevolutionary patterns and processes associated with diversification in the deep sea.

In this study, we focus on the evolution of bioluminescence across non-percomorph teleost lineages (e.g.,
dragonfishes, lanternfishes, lizardfishes), and explore whether the evolution of bioluminescence has
impacted diversification in the deep sea. Few studies have investigated the evolution of bioluminescence
within a phylogenetic context, and we examine the character evolution of differing bioluminescent
morphologies (e.g., photophores, lures/barbels) and strategies (e.g., camouflage, predation) across deep-
sea lineages.



Davy, Christina (University of Toronto); Murphy, Robert (University of Toronto/Royal Ontario Museum,
Canada)

Genotypes and ghosts - comparative landscape genetics of a northern turtle community

Conservation and landscape genetics analyses of reptiles often assume that species will have similar
responses to factors that can influence their genetic structure (for example, population fragmentation).
There are many conservation genetics studies of individual snake, lizard and turtle species, but data from



                                                                                                         163
multiple species are not often integrated. We use conservation and landscape genetics analyses to
investigate variation in genetic population structure among three turtle species with differing behaviours,
life history strategies and degrees of endangerment and population fragmentation. We analze three sets
of microsatellite genotype data, one from the Spotted Turtle ( Clemmys guttata ), another from the
Blanding‘s Turtle ( Emydoidea blandingii ) and the third from the Snapping Turtle ( Chelydra serpentina ),
from populations sampled across southern Ontario, Canada. Using these data we test hypotheses about
the genetic effects of population fragmentation on these three species. We also use standard landscape
genetic analyses to test hypotheses about the relative influence that major landscape features in southern
Ontario have had on the population structure of each species and discuss important similarities and
differences between them.



Daza, Juan D. (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron M. (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United
States); Snively, Eric D. (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

New data from old geckos: paleontological contributions to the understanding of gekkotan
evolution

Gekkota (‗geckos‘ and pygopodids) is a highly diverse group of lizards that today is represented by
almost 1500 species. These typically small lizards have a lightly-built and fragile skeleton and are
generally characterized by decelerated terminal fusion of bones (paedomorphosis). This makes
gekkotans particularly susceptible to disarticulation and consequently the group is poorly represented in
the fossil record. Most molecular dating analyses have inferred that gekkotans had differentiated from
their closest relatives by the Early Cretaceous, but some credibility intervals push gecko origins into the
Early Jurassic. Gekkota has been classified as a subordinated group within Gekkonomorpha, which also
includes the genus Parviraptor and an unnamed but well studied lizard from the Gobi (AMNH FR21444).
The re-examination of critical fossil specimens combined with the application of High-resolution X-ray
computed tomography, as well as insights from comparative embryological and neontological material,
allow us to refine our understanding of early gecko evolution. Morphological results indicate that Gekkota
and Gekonomorpha are redundant, and that of the various Mesozoic taxa referred to Gekkota in the past,
only Gobekko cretacicus and Hoburogekko suchanovi (and possibly Cretaceogekko burmae) are actually
part of this clade. These Cretaceous geckos present combinations of characters (including partially fused
frontal and dentary bones) not present in any of the extant gekkotan subgroups and may represent two
different stages in the consolidation of the Gekkotan skull. The Tertiary fossil record indicates that
geckos, perhaps representing more than one of the living families, were well represented in Europe
between the Paleocene and the Miocene. Some of these fossil forms had highly ornamented dermal
bones that are unusual for the living genera. Miocene lizards in amber from Hispaniola are
unambiguously assignable to the extant genus of dwarf geckos, Sphaerodactylus, but specimens studied
so far represent new species, some of which exhibit character states unknown in the living taxa. Amber
fossils suggest that diverse communities of dwarf geckos represented by different ecomorphs have been
present in the Greater Antilles for at least 15–20 MY.




                                                                                                       164
de Carvalho, José Eduardo (Department of Biological Science ¿ Federal University of São Paulo);
Milsom, William (Univ. British Columbia, Canada); Andrade, Denis (State Univ. Sao Paulo, Canada)

Effects of Feeding on Ventilation in Anurans

The ingestion of large meals in some ectothermic is followed by remarkable changes in the metabolic
rate. The evidences obtained with several species of amphibians that feed infrequently suggest that the
increased energetic demand during the postprandial period is related to morphological and physiological
adjustments in order to up-regulate the capacities of digestion and nutrient absorption. In species that
feed large meals, the intense acid secretion into the stomach leads to the alkalization of blood, which
seems to be partly compensated by a respiratory acidosis. However, given the effects of hypercapnia on
the control of breathing in vertebrates, it is possible that the sensitivity to CO2 can be modulated during
the post-prandial period in order to prevent the stimulatory effects on the ventilatory responses that follow
meal intake. In this talk I will present the results obtained for the bullfrogs Lithobates catesbeianus
combining the effects of progressive hypercarbia and the ingestion of large meals. We performed
measurements of respiratory and circulatory variables in cannulated bullfrogs kept in fasting and 48 hours
after meal ingestion. Ventilation was stimulated by progressive exposure to different levels of CO2 in
inhaled air. In general, heart rate, O2 total content, Hct and PaCO2 were increased during the post-
prandial period with minor effects of CO2. Total ventilation tends to decrease in fasted bullfrogs in
comparison to fed animals during the progressive hypercarbia, given by the decrease in breathing
frequency instead tidal volume. In the post-hypercarbia period, unfed animals exhibited an increase in
total ventilation as a consequence of the increase in breathing frequency and tidal volume. Tidal volume
did not increase in fed bullfrogs during the post-hypercarbia period influencing total ventilation. Our
results indicate a possible constraining between meal ingestion and ventilation capacity in bullfrogs.
Financial support: FAPESP/CNPq



de Paula, Almir (Universidade de Brasilia); Colli, Guarino Rinaldi (Universidade de Brasilia, Brasília,
Distrito Federal, Brazil)

Structure of a community of anurans in the Cerrado of Brazil Central

Communities are influenced by several ecological factors such as trophic, spatial and temporal niches, as
well as historical factors. The Cerrado is the second largest biome in Brazil and the world's most diverse
savanna consisting of a mosaic of vegetation physiognomies ranging from flooded grasslands to gallery
forests that contains approximately 204 anuran species. These organisms are strongly associated to
environmental variables due to their physical and physiological traits. We placed four transects in each of
the following Cerrado physiognomies: grassland, cerrado (s.s.) and gallery forest. Transects were
sampled weekly for a year using active search. We recorded species distributions along physiognomies
as well as microhabitats. We collected data on the physiognomies structural features and weather
information. In addition, we constructed a supertree from available phylogenies found in the literature. To
test if factors were influencing community structure, we performed a species co-occurrence analysis by
vegetation physiognomy, microhabitat, point sampling and month. A multiple regression was used to test
the association between environmental variables and species diversity. To test if historical factors were
influencing community structure, we performed a correlation analysis between species co-occurrence and
their phylogenetic distances. We captured 708 anurans belonging to 5 families and consisting of 19
species. This study demonstrates that the sampled anuran community was not structured by
physiognomy (P = 1) or point sampling (P> 0.05), but was structured by microhabitat (P = 0,01) and
month (P <0.01). Rainfall was positively correlated with abundance (F = 52.99, df = 10, r ² = 0.85, P <<
0.01) and richness (F = 17.49; df = 10, r ² = 0.64, P <0.01). The correlation analysis between species co-



                                                                                                         165
occurrence and their phylogenetic distances revealed that the community is phylogenetically structured
by microhabitat (P << 0.01). Therefore, the Estação Ecológica de Águas Emendadas anuran community
structure is influenced by historical factors in their use and selection of microhabitats. Nevertheless,
anurans are dependent on humidity causing rainfall, an ecological factor, to be influencing species time of
activity. This community‘s structure is more influenced by the availability of microhabitats than
physiognomy.



de Sá, Fábio Perin (Cornell University); Haddad, Célio F. B. (UNESP-Rio Claro, Rio Claro/SP, Brazil);
Zamudio, Kelly R. (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States)

Parental relationship between guardian males of Thoropa taophora (Anura, Cycloramphidae) and
their saxicolous offspring

The reproductive success of individuals in a population of one species is strongly associated with
individual traits as well as the social and ecological contexts in wich breeding activities occur. Individual
factors that influence fitness can be identified, however how variation in social and ecological conditions
alters the patterns of reproductive success within populations is still poorly understood. We characterize
the reproductive success of adult Thoropa taophora males and determine how it changes among and
within different breeding sites. Thoropa taophora is a neotropical anuran species that occupies saxicolous
environments in coastal regions of Atlantic Coastal Forest in the state of São Paulo state, Brazil. This
anuran places its terrestrial eggs in wet seeps on rock outcroppings near seashores that maintain a film
of water that flows on the rock surface, where their semiterrestrial tadpoles develop. Males compete for
the limited number of breeding territories (water seeps) and actively guard territories and egg masses.
These behavioral mating system characteristics are likely directly associated with the reproductive
success of each adult individual. We sampled tadpoles in eight different rock seeps and, using molecular
techniques for estimation of relatedness and paternity, we propose to characterize the behavioral mating
system and the consequent fitness of the adults of T. taophora. We will test the hypotheses that: (1) the
defense of reproductive territories increases the reproductive success of the males by the exclusion of
competitors or (2) males obtain more than one female for amplexus, resulting in a single male guarding
eggs from distinct females, and (3) if there is sharing of the same reproductive territory by more than one
male, the relatedness among them will be higher than any other male of the population, with kin selection
operating. Combined, these data will allow an unusually fine-scale analysis of the factors contributing to
individual reproductive success in territorial amphibians.



de Witt, Derek (Florida Gulf Coast University); Agyekumhene, Andrews (Ghana Wildlife Division,
Forestry Commision, Winneba, Ghana, United States); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort
Myers, FL, United States)

Using Local Knowledge to Test Patterns of Nesting Sea Turtles in Ada Foah, Ghana

Environmental cues that trigger beach emergences by female sea turtles are still not fully understood. In
addition, certain aspects of nest site selection require further investigation. It is important to understand
these because such behaviors influence nest success and hatchling phenotypes. Understanding such
survival differences could aid in future sea turtle conservation efforts. Previously, researchers have relied
on local knowledge to aid their understanding of sea turtle biology. In this paper, we use four years of
nesting data in Ghana to assess the accuracy of local knowledge regarding patterns of sea turtle nesting
emergences. Ada Foah, Ghana (and the surrounding area) contains approximately 9 km of beach used



                                                                                                         166
by nesting leatherback ( Dermochelys coriacea) and olive ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea) sea turtles.
Previous conversations with area residents indicate a commonly held view that sea turtles emerge to lay
eggs when the moon is closer to full and is positioned in the western sky. Residents also indicated sea
turtles require a high tide to emerge onto the beach. To determine the accuracy of their assertions,
nesting surveys were conducted from August 2006 through 2010 to determine the tide, moon phase, and
the moon‘s positions during each sea turtle emergence. In 2010, sand surface temperatures were also
recorded to determine if female nest site selection is influenced by sand temperature. Of the 1507
emergences recorded in Ada Foah, 752 occurred while the moon was not visible. For those that nested
under moonlight, a chi-squared analysis indicated a significant preference for emerging near a full moon
for both olive ridley (n = 461, p < .0001) and leatherback turtles (n =294, p < .0001).

However, an analysis using all emergences indicated a significant preference for nesting during a new
moon period (olive ridley n = 929, p < .0001; leatherback n = 578, p < .0001). The moon location analysis
indicates a significant difference from random (p < .0001 for both species), with approximately 25% of
emergences occurring with the moon to the west and east. Neither species showed a significant
preference for emerging during a particular tidal period (olive ridley p = .4505; leatherback p = .2441).
While the local predictions did indicate a preference for emergence near a full moon, it is possible that
residents are more likely to see nesting sea turtles when there is more light available. Because of this, it
is uncertain whether or not the residents of Ada Foah have made an accurate prediction.



Deary, Alison (VIMS); Hilton, Eric (VIMS, Gloucester Point, United States)

Development of the Pharyngeal jaws in the drums (Sciaenidae) of the Chesapeake Bay with
comparisons to other members of the family

The goal of ecomorphology is to identify the aspects of morphology that influence an organism‘s
ecological role, although little information is available for the early development of many functional
complexes in most fishes. As such, it is difficult to identify the morphological features that influence the
ecological position of early life history stage fishes. As adults and juveniles, members of the family
Sciaenidae possess varying mouth structures and exploit a plethora of foraging habitats and prey types.
To evaluate the development of the pharyngeal jaws in early life history stage sciaenids, the pharyngeal
jaw elements from cleared and double stained specimens were prepared, dissected, and measured using
a Zeiss SteREO DiscoveryV20 microscope. Gill raker shape, gill filament length, and the area of the
upper and lower toothplates were recorded in nine of the 14 sciaenid species that use nursery habitats in
the Chesapeake Bay. Sciaenid species were grouped based on their primary habitat as adults (benthic
vs. pelagic). Stomach contents were identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level and group the prey
by primary habitat (i.e. benthic crustacean, pelagic crustacean, etc.) and relative hardness (e.g., fishes
relatively soft, molluscs relatively hard). In an examination of the oral jaws, significant differences were
found in the length of the ascending process, lower jaw, and upper jaw between benthic and pelagic
foraging sciaenid species. In a preliminary dietary analysis, non-significant dietary differences were
observed between benthic and pelagic foraging sciaenid species. Approximately 33% of the diet of
Leiostomus xanthurus, a benthic foraging sciaenid, consists of benthic prey items whereas less than 5%
of the diet of Bairdiella chrysoura, a pelagic foraging sciaenid, consists of benthic prey items. It is
expected that unlike the oral jaw elements, which are matched to prey capture (i.e. evasive vs. non-
evasive), pharyngeal jaw elements will be matched to the degree of prey hardness since these structures
are used to process prey before swallowing. Species that prey on relatively harder-bodied organisms
(Aplodinotus grunniens, Micropogonias undulatus, L. xanthurus, Menticirrhus spp.) are expected to have




                                                                                                        167
greater pharyngeal toothplate areas than species that prey on relatively softer-bodied organisms (B.
chrysoura, Cynoscion nebulosus, C. regalis, Sciaenops ocellatus, Larimus fasciatus).




Degani, Gad (Tel Hai Academic College);

Various DNA Sequence analysis of amphibian larval in the semi-arid zone

The molecular DNA variation among S. infraimmaculata and T. vittatus larvae populations, representing
diverse breeding sites in Israel, was analyzed by cytochrome b fragment, control region, DNA polymerase
chain reaction (RAPD PCR) and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) methods. Although the
molecular polymorphisms in both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA are small, they reflect a sharp
ecological separation between DNA variation of seasonal breeding sites and permanent water sources.
These are presumably adaptive changes caused by natural selection. Low genetic (cyt b and 12S, and
RAPD PCR) variation, was revealed by sequences from specimens of H. savignyi, B. viridis, R. bedriagae
and P. syriacus populations, respectively, at each location, analyzed by Arlequin software. We found that
both H. savignyi, and B. viridis are adapted to more unpredictable breeding places than R. bedriagae and
P. syriacus.



DeGregorio, Brett (University of Illinois); Weatherhead, Patrick (University of Illinois, Champaign, United
States); Sperry, Jinelle (University of Illinois, Urbana, United States)

Linking snake activity and habitat selection to songbird nest predation

Nest predators can adversely affect the viability of songbird populations. Despite substantial research on
this predator-prey interaction, almost all of the focus has been on the birds rather than their nest
predators. Our understanding of the factors that bring predators and nests into contact is lacking in nearly
all ecosystems and for most inter-specific interactions. In many ecosystems, snakes have been identified
as the primary predators of bird nests. We used radiotelemetry during the spring and summers of 2011 –
2012 to document the activity and habitat selection of three snake species (rat snakes, Elaphe obsoleta;
black racers, Coluber constrictor; corn snake, Elaphe guttata) known to prey on songbird nests at our
study site in South Carolina. Our focus was on quantifying the seasonal and diel activity patterns of the
three snake species. We simultaneously monitored over 250 avian nests to test the hypothesis that
predation risk should increase for nests during periods when snakes are more active and in habitats
preferred by the snake species. Additionally, we monitored over 100 bird nests with miniature video
cameras to document predator identity, the timing of predation events, and the outcomes of each
predation attempt. Here we present the seasonal and diel activity patterns of the three snake species and
describe the link between their behavior and the daily survival of monitored avian nests.




                                                                                                        168
Dehling, J.M. (University of Koblenz-Landau); Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department
of Biology. Koblenz, Germany, Koblenz, Germany)

Advertisement call differentiation mimic phylogenetic relationship among Rwandan reed frogs
(Hyperoliidae: Hyperolius)

Since 2009 we have been analysing the diversity of hyperoliid frogs of Rwanda by recording their
advertisement calls and collecting specimens for morphological and molecular identification using 16s
rRNA barcoding. So far, we identified four described Hyperolius species ( castaneus, discodactylus,
kivuensis, lateralis ), and another five not assignable to any described species which is currently
considered valid (sp. 1: nasutus -group; sp. 2 and 3: viridiflavus -group, sp. 4: cinnamomeoventris -
group; sp. 5: castaneus -group). Afrixalus quadrivittatus were included as a related non-Hyperolius
taxon. According to maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony phylogenetic analyses,                     A.
quadrivitattus is an outgroup to all Hyperolius, and H. sp. 1 ( nasutus -group) is basal to the other
Hyperolius , whereas H. castaneus , H. discodactylus , H. lateralis and H. sp. 5 are closely related and
form a well-supported clade. A separate clade is formed by the species of the viridiflavus -group. This
pattern is supported by advertisement call structure. The castaneus -clade gives short calls consisting of
a single pulse group including equidistantly spaced 7 – 20 pulses. The viridiflavus -clade has very short
and tonal advertisement calls.

The basal nasutus -group taxon produces a complex call including a castaneus –like long first pulse
group followed by up to three single well spaced pulses. A. quadrivittatus has the most complex
advertisement call including a long first pulse group followed by up to 50 short pulse groups with 2-3
pulses.



Dehling, J.M. (University of Koblenz-Landau); Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department
of Biology. Koblenz, Germany, Koblenz, Germany)

Diversity of Ridged Frogs (Ptychadena) in montane wetlands of eastern Rwanda: Bioacoustic,
morphological and molecular evidence

We investigated the diversity of Ridged Frogs in cultivated as well as natural montane wetlands in eastern
Rwanda. At thirteen locations we detected between one and three syntopic species of Ptychadena on
visual and acoustic encounter surveys. We identified the three species tentatively as P. anchieta, P.
porosissim, and P . cf. mascareniensis. Comparison of a partial sequence of the mitochondrial 16S
rRNA gene of the collected specimens showed an uncorrected pairwise distance of 10.5-14.2 % between
the three species. From each individual collected, we recorded 30 mensual and meristic characters.
Principal component analysis identified several mensural characters on the basis of which the species
can be distinguished unequivocally. We further provide a number of qualitative morphological characters
that allow easy species identification in the field. Prior to collection, we recorded the advertisement call of
the male specimens.       A discriminant analysis showed that the three species can be distinguished
unequivocally based on the parameters of their advertisement calls.




                                                                                                           169
Deitloff, Jennifer (Auburn University); Graham, Sean (Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA, United States)

Courtship and Mate Guarding Behavior in Eurycea aquatica and Eurycea cirrigera.

The Eurycea bislineata complex represents an excellent model for investigating the functional
significance of sexual dimorphism in head shape in salamanders due to the range of male morphologies
found in this group. Species within the E. bislineata complex exhibits a continuum of male morphologies,
ranging from slender, cirri-possessing morphs to robust-headed, cirri-lacking morphs. Some species only
exhibit one morphology or the other, while populations of E. wilderae possess males of both morphs. In
previous studies, we have compared the morphology of males and females of E. aquatica and E.
cirrigera . We found Eurycea aquatica exhibit sexual dimorphism in head shape with males having
robust head morphology compared to females of the species. In addition, populations of E. cirrigera that
we examined contain males with the slender, cirri-possessing morphology and these populations do not
exhibit sexual dimorphism in head shape. Further, the larger head in males of E. aquatica is due to
larger musculature around the jaw. Therefore, we hypothesized that males of E. aquatica use these
enlarged muscles for biting rival males during courtship of a female. Because E. cirrigera lacks the
enlarged musculature, males of this species would not bite rival males during similar encounters. To test
this hypothesis, we placed a male and female of the same species together and observed their behavior
for 20 minutes, then placed an additional male in the container and observed interactions between the
males for an additional 20 minutes. During these trials, males and females of E. aquatica engaged in
courtship behavior during most trials; in addition, males were aggressive and bit intruding males. Males
and females of E. cirrigera did not engage in courtship often. During the few trials in which courtship did
occur, males of E. cirrigera chased intruding males but rarely bit them. From these results we conclude
that males of E. aquatica are more aggressive in guarding potential mates than are males of E.
cirrigera. Thus, the adaptive significance of larger heads and more extensive jaw musculature in E.
aquatica appears to be for male-male combat and mate defense.



Delaney, David (Eastern Illinois University); Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL,
United States)

Life-history characteristics of a population of Ring-necked Snakes (Colubridae: <i>Diadophis</i>)
occupying anthropogenic habitat

Anthropogenic activity can alter the environment in ways that benefit some species. For herpetofauna,
such alteration can occur in the form of trash heaps, log piles, rip-rap or other objects that provide retreat
or hibernation sites. During emergence and the early portion of the activity season, in 2010 - 2012, we
sampled a population of Ring-necked Snakes ( Diadophis punctatus ) inhabiting a 1200-m levee sited
between a river and a reservoir. Constructed using rip-rap boulders, the levee provides abundant cover
objects, under which we caught all subjects.      We encountered individuals representing all life-history
stages; the density at our study site was among the highest reported for this species.           Inter-annual
recapture rates ranged between 0 and 5 %. Subject mass was strongly correlated with snout-vent length;
among adults, males tended to be longer and heavier than females. We contend that the rip-rap habitat
along the levee provides multiple benefits for these fossorial snakes in the form of microhabitats that
satisfy thermoregulatory, dietary, and hibernation requirements.                 Features available within
anthropogenic habitat might not only be tolerated by Ring-necked Snakes, but also allow this species to
attain higher population densities than would occur in natural settings.




                                                                                                          170
Delia, Jesse (Boston University); Warkentin, Karen (Boston University, Boston, MA, United States)

Parental care and hatching plasticity in two glassfrogs (Centrolenidae): Interspecific and
geographic comparisons

The history and diversity of parental care among frogs has provided key insights into the adaptive
evolution of life histories. Although there are examples of more complex parental care strategies, in many
species care appears to serve one or two functions, namely protection from predators and from egg
dehydration. In glassfrogs, parents hydrate and protect arboreal eggs, but the quality of care varies. Our
initial experimental removals of paternal Hyalinobatrachium fleischmanni males revealed that embryos
respond to parental care quality; they can accelerate hatching by up to 56% to escape abandoned,
unprotected, drying eggs, but embryos in safer, cared for clutches extend embryonic development
substantially beyond hatching competence . Here, we conducted male-removal experiments with this
species at different embryonic stages at two sites (Mexico and Panama) to examine how local conditions
may influence the adaptive value of care and the embryo hatching response to risk. We also conducted
parallel experiments with a congener with more intense parental attendance, H. colymbiphyllum , that co-
occurs at our site in Panama. Male care significantly increased embryo survivorship and embryos
responded to parental abandonment and associated risks (i.e., dehydration and predator attacks) by
hatching earlier in both species. Despite very different frequencies of parental attendance between
species, the improvement in offspring survival was not greater with more intense care. However, we
found dramatically divergent primary functions of care between species (hydration vs. antipredator
defense), despite their similar reproductive mode and exposure to the same predators and abiotic
conditions. Across sites predation, mainly by spiders that build webs over clutches, was much higher in
Panama. These results demonstrate how differences in local risks can affect the overall value of parental
care, how alternative parental strategies function in response to different risks among closely related,
ecologically similar species, and how the nature and quality of parental care can affect adaptive embryo
behaviors.



Delia, Jesse (Boston University); Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, United
States)

The interaction of parental care and hatching plasticity: An example from a Neotropical glassfrog
(Anura: Centrolenidae)

The evolution of parental care has long been a topic of central interest in evolutionary ecology. More
recently, hatching plasticity in response to environmental variation has become a focus of intense
scientific interest, indicating that embryos are capable of defensive strategies that improve fitness.
Theoretically, parental care is likely to have strong interactions with hatching plasticity, but this has rarely
been tested. Here we investigate the interaction of parental care and hatching plasticity in the Neotropical
glassfrog Hyalinobatrachium fleischmanni from southern Mexico. This frog has both male parental care
and hatching plasticity, making it particularly suitable for this type of investigation. Males provide care to
arboreal egg masses via nocturnal egg brooding, which functions to prevent embryonic desiccation. We
specifically focus on the question of whether or not embryos in this species respond adaptively to a lack
of paternal care by hatching earlier. We also analyzed the effect of environmental moisture on paternal
care and hatching plasticity, to control for this critical parameter. Experiments revealed that the intensity
of egg brooding is strongly affected by temporal variation in environmental moisture, which affects the
rate of egg dehydration. Males compensate for variation in weather and climate to maintain egg hydration
by adjusting the frequency of brooding. However, care intensity also varies as a result of a tradeoff males




                                                                                                            171
face between caring for eggs versus capitalizing on mating opportunities. Poor care can reduce survival
to hatching and result in a truncated embryonic period. A male removal experiment revealed that parental
care had a significant effect on the length of the embryonic period, with removal clutches concluding
hatching earlier than control clutches. Moreover rainfall affected the embryonic period of removal clutches
significantly more than that of controls. This suggests that in the safety of male care embryos exhibit more
consistent timing of hatching, regardless of weather conditions, whereas embryos directly exposed to the
abiotic environment rely on hatching plasticity to hatch early and avoid desiccation when necessary.



Della Togna, Gina (Center for Species Survival Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute); Comizzoli,
Pierre; Gratwicke, Brian (Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, DC, United States);
Trudeau, Vance (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Structural and Functional Characterization of the Panamanian Golden Frog (Atelopus zeteki)
Spermatozoa - Impact of Medium Osmolality on the Motility Activation and Cell Viability

The Panamanian Golden Frog, Atelopus zeteki (Anura: Bufonidae), is an iconic and endemic species
from Panama, already believed to be extinct in the wild. Therefore, captive reproduction programs are the
only hope for the species to survive the actual global amphibian extinction crisis and be a source for
reintroduction. There is very limited information available on the reproductive biology of A. zeteki or
amphibian species in general; in fact, there currently is no basic information available on the structure,
physiology, collection or preservation of sperm from living golden frogs. This lack of knowledge turns into
a great obstacle when trying to implement assisted reproduction in captivity.

 The overall goal of this study is to characterize critical structural and functional properties of Atelopus
zeteki‘s spermatozoa. The specific goal of our research is to characterize the impact of the hormonal
stimulation and osmolality specifically on: 1. The sperm morphology and DNA integrity; 2. The motility,
mitochondrial function and viability, and 3. Sperm activation signaling pathway. Sperm samples will be
collected from 29 males with the use of hormonal stimulation (hCG, GnRH and Amphiplex) and assessed
for basic parameters such as morphology, concentration, osmolality, motility, forward progressive
movement and pH. The impact of osmolality in the structure and functionality of the cells will be
assessed by evaluating the response of the cells to osmotic changes through the analysis of DNA
integrity, mitochondrial vesicle integrity and the sperm-activation signaling pathway under different
osmotic conditions

Preliminary results indicate that the hormones hCG, GnRH, and the cocktail Amphiplex efficiently
stimulate the production of sperm in A. zeteki. Evaluating the efficacy of the hormones is important to
determine which one provides the best concentration of spermatozoa given that the obtained volumes of
spermic urine are usually very small (<150 μl) and large concentrations are needed for assessing and
preserving sperm cells. Average concentrations of spermatozoa for each of the treatments are: GnRH
(0.1 μg/μl): 1.35x106 cells/ml, GnRH (0.2 μg/μl): 1.47x106 cells/ml, hCG (0.5 IU/μl): 4.75x104 cells/ml,
hCG (1 IU/μl): 9.99 x105 cells/ml, and Amphiplex (a combination of 4 μg of GnRH-A + 10 μg per gram
bodyweight of Metoclopramide): 1.21x106 cells/ml. Basic parameters have been determined as averages:
volume: 73.3 μl, pH: 7.28, percentage of Motility: 79.5%, percentage of forward progressive movement
(FPM): 57.7%, and osmolality: 85.13 mOsmol/kg. Samples are currently being analyzed for morphology
followed by the determination of DNA integrity.

This study will assess for the first time the structural and functional traits of Atelopus zeteki spermatozoa
and evaluate the effect of osmotic changes on the viability of the cells for the future implementation of
accurate protocols for A. zeteki sperm cryopreservation. The use of innovative techniques such as NIR



                                                                                                         172
spectroscopy, Flow Cytometry, Comet Assay and Tunnel Assay will help us evaluate several parameters
required to understand A. zeteki sperm structure and functionality. Taken into consideration that there is
no available information on Atelopus sperm, knowledge gained from our observations can be applied for
the conservation and captive reproduction of other endangered Atelopus species.



Dell'Apa, Andrea (East Carolina University); Cudney-Burch, Jennifer; Rulifson, Roger (East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC, United States)

Male:Female Ratio Changes In Spiny Dogfish (Squalus acanthias) Fishery-Dependent Surveys In
Cape Cod, MA: Fishery Management Aspects

The international exploitation of the sexually dimorphic spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) is driven by the
European market, which demands for large females. This sex-selective fishery led to over-exploitation of
the US Atlantic stock, forcing the adoption of a Fishery Management Plan (FMP) to rebuild it. The species
biological characteristics (long gestation period, slow growth rate), and the targeting of adult females,
raise concern on the conservation status of dogfish worldwide, leading to the discussion for inserting the
species in the CITES‘s list for regulating the trade. In case of listing, a fishery must provide for its
sustainability in order for the stock to be commercialized. The sustainability of the US Atlantic dogfish
stock is measured based on the biomass of adult females. Given the decrease in adult females reported
for this stock over the last decade, alternative management strategies to enhance the fishery
sustainability are needed. One possibility currently unexplored would be the development of a male-only
directed fishery. The aim of this research is to test for significance in the male:female ratio changes in
commercial surveys conducted in the Cape Cod, MA area, where local fishers observe higher abundance
of males early in the day and higher presence of females as the day progresses. Results suggest the
possibility for a male-only directed longline fishery within 10 miles off the coast of the Cape Cod
Peninsula, where higher presence of schools of males occur in shallower water early in the day and at
different fishing seasons. These results also support the employment of standardized research effort in
the study area to monitor fine-scale behavior patterns of males through day and season in order to
characterize male dogfish movements and to assess whether a male-only directed fishery in the area is
viable



Delpiani, Gabriela (UNMdP, CONICET); Spath, Cecilia (UNMdP, CONICET, Mar del Plata, Argentina);
Figueroa, Daniel (UNMdP, Mar del Plata, Canada)

Quantitative analysis of the denture of Amblyraja doellojuradoi

Teeth morphology is an important tool widely used in taxonomic, biological and fossil teeth studies of
cartilaginous fishes. Furthermore, the aim of the present study is the quantitative analysis of Amblyraja
doellojuradoi‘s dentition. This species inhabits the Southwest Atlantic from 35º-56º S, between 51-642 m.

The number of rows of teeth in the upper and lower jaw of individuals of both sexes was counted. In both
jaws, the width and length of each tooth belonging to the row selected from each area (commissural
teeth, commissural region teeth, symphysis region teeth, symphysis teeth) was measured.

The total number of teeth rows in the upper jaw ranged from 25-37, while in the lower jaw ranged from
24-35. In the upper jaws both males and females showed significant differences in the number of rows of
teeth, as also in the lower (p= 0.005; p= 0.001 respectively). However, the number of rows in the upper
and lower jaw for both sexes was not significantly different (p= 0.154; p= 0.661 respectively). Regarding



                                                                                                       173
the measurement of teeth, it was observed that the width of the teeth for both sexes and both jaws is
maintained constant along the rows and in all areas. Variations were observed in regard to tooth length.
In the upper jaw of the female, the length of the teeth of the left commissural row is constant. While in the
remaining rows, the teeth are increasing its length from the outside towards the inside of the jaw. In the
lower jaw, the teeth of the commissural rows (left and right) have a constant length, unlike the rest of the
rows that have progressively increased the length of teeth from the outside, as mentioned above. In the
upper jaw of the males was observed that the length of the teeth is not constant, increasing its length
from the external to internal teeth. In the lower jaw of the males was found the same pattern of variation
of the length of the teeth seen in the lower jaw of females.

The importance of this work is to highlight the sexual heterodoncy and the deterioration suffered by teeth.
In the case of sexual heterodoncy, is known to be a feature associated with the reduction of intraspecific
competition for food and with the bite during reproduction. Finally, in the second case emphasized the
importance of the replacement of older and damaged teeth in elasmobranchs.



Dennison, Siobhan (Macquarie University); McAlpin, Steve; Whiting, Martin; Stow, Adam (Macquarie
University, Sydney, NSW, Australia)

Dispersal, group composition and mating system of a social, burrowing lizard

The Great Desert Skink, Liopholis kintorei , is a large scincid lizard inhabiting sandy arid regions of
Central Australia. It belongs to a group of Australian lizards containing several species that have recently
been used to investigate the early evolution and maintenance of vertebrate sociality. Most social lizards
utilize pre-existing shelter sites such as rock crevices, but L. kintorei is unique in that individuals
cooperatively construct and maintain extensive burrow systems that house close kin. Groups contain
adult males and females with multiple cohorts of offspring that often include full-siblings. We use genetic
techniques to estimate dispersal and gene flow among L. kintorei burrow systems, and to characterize
the mating system and group structure of these extraordinary lizards. Sociality is often associated with a
largely monogamous mating system, as this raises the average within-group relatedness, and thus
increases inclusive fitness benefits. Due to the long-term stability of L. kintorei groups, we predict that
there is mate fidelity over multiple years. If individuals exhibit a long-term investment in a single partner,
we would expect them to be selective in their choice of breeding partners to maximize the fitness of their
offspring. These data will contribute towards further investigation of the costs and benefits of group living.
Furthermore, there are implications of these social behaviors to the conservation of the species, listed as
vulnerable in Australia.



Denoel, Mathieu (University of Liege);

Video-tracking locomotor behavior of amphibian tadpoles in response to endosulfan and
predation risk

To understand the complex role of pesticides on organisms, such as amphibians, it is of primary
importance to take into account sublethal effects. In this perspective, behavioral ecotoxicology is an
emerging field that makes benefits from new technologies. Particularly, video-tracking analyses now give
detailed quantitative data from movement patterns, but have almost not been yet applied in amphibians.
We aimed at using such techniques to determine the potential effects of environmental concentrations of
an organochlorine pesticide (endosulfan) on the locomotor behavior of amphibian tadpoles (Rana



                                                                                                          174
temporaria). In addition, we determined individual responses to the simulation of a predatory attack. All
experiments were carried out in laboratory replicated controlled conditions. Video-tracks were built out of
more than one million spatial data that were then converted into various behaviors. Endosulfan affected
all analyzed patterns: contaminated tadpoles moved less, at a slower speed, and in a different portion of
their habitat than control tadpoles. The response of contaminated tadpoles to a predatory attack was less
effective than that one of control individuals. These results indicate that (1) video-tracking is a powerful
technique to quantify amphibian behavioral patterns; and (2) endosulfan affects amphibians at
environmental concentrations in a complex way, i.e. in altering different behavioral traits. In a natural
environment, involving predators, the ineffective response of contaminated tadpoles could be particularly
detrimental.



Denton, Robert (The Ohio State University); Kenyon, Laura (The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
United States); Greenwald, Katherine (Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI, United States); Gibbs,
Lisle (The Ohio State University, Columbus, United States)

Using multilocus coalescent-based methods to test for hybridization between two Ambystoma
salamander species in Ohio, USA

Gene tree-based multilocus models for detecting hybridization offer a new analytical approach to
investigating this evolutionary process in amphibians. Ambystoma texanum (smallmouth salamander)
and A. barbouri (streamside salamander) are sister species with distributions that are potentially
adjacent to each other in Central Ohio. Using a mtDNA-defined barcode, we recently identified multiple
individuals from North-Central Ohio as A. barbouri , well outside their currently accepted range. We used
additional nDNA markers to explore several hypotheses to explain the distribution of these ―misidentified‖
individuals: 1) These are A. barbouri individuals and represent a significant range extension; 2) The
mtDNA barcode does not correctly distinguish between these two species in these populations; or 3)
Hybridization is occurring between these species in Central Ohio. We tested these hypotheses using
STEM-hy, a program that uses multilocus gene trees under the coalescent model to evaluate different
hypotheses about hybridization using model selection. Using ten nuclear markers, we generated gene
trees from reference A. texanum individuals (Northeast Ohio), reference A. barbouri individuals
(Southwest Ohio), and the putative hybrids that were identified as A. barbouri using the mtDNA barcode.
Our results suggest that the ―misidentified‖ (putative hybrid) individuals are, in fact, A. barbouri , indicating
no hybridization and a range extension for this species. STEM-hy could provide a useful tool for assigning
cryptic, unknown individuals to a reference group using sequence data in addition to providing estimates
of hybridization.



DeVore, Jayna L. (University of Georgia); Maerz, John C. (University of Georgia, Canada)

Metamorphic Strategy Predicts Susceptibility to Alterations in Top-Down and Bottom-Up
Influences Initiated by Plant Invasion

Metamorphosis is a common process during which an irreversible ontogenetic transition leads to a shift in
challenges. Certain trade-offs are inherent in metamorphosis; for example, species that metamorphose
early and small have frequently minimized mortality in the first environment, but face increased risk in the
second. Species have developed a number of strategies to optimize this transition and, to ensure that
they reach reproductive size, their post-metamorphic behavior is often compensatory to its timing. The
reciprocal nature of this transition raises the possibility that vulnerability to secondary habitat quality may



                                                                                                             175
vary by strategy. In order to explore the interplay between metamorphic strategy and environmental
change we monitored the response of three amphibian species to habitat alterations driven by Japanese
stilt-grass (Microstegium vimineum) invasion. We stocked metamorphic American toads (Anaxyrus [Bufo]
americanus), southern leopard frogs (Lithobates [Rana] sphenocephalus), and eastern newts
(Notophthalmus viridescens) into 58m2 pens spanning 8 invasion fronts. Using robust capture periods we
tracked the survival and growth of these 2,600 marked individuals for 10 months. We found that the initial
6-week survival of toads was lower in invaded habitats, likely due to increased predation pressure from
lycosid spiders, but that this effect diminished as they grew. Leopard frog survival was not affected by
invasion status; however, growth rates were lower in invaded habitats, likely due to reduced prey
availability. Neither the high survival nor slow growth rates of efts were influenced by invasion status.
These results show species-specific responses to invasion-driven habitat changes. We hypothesize that
species that metamorphose early and forage actively to support rapid post-metamorphic growth are more
susceptible to increased predation pressure, whereas species that metamorphosed at a larger size and
are more cryptic, ambush foragers are more affected by altered prey availability. In contrast, species with
flexible time horizons to reproduction may prioritize survival over growth by aestivating during adverse
conditions, minimizing trophic effects. These results demonstrate that metamorphic strategy can influence
the nature and strength of the responses of related species to environmental change, and support
theoretical models that predict the prioritization of either growth or survival as a function of the timing of
metamorphosis.



Diaz de la Vega, Anibal (Instituto de Biologia UNAM); Mendez, Fausto (Instituto de Biologia UNAM,
Canada)

Are clonal lineages identical?

Closer relatives species could present similar physiological requirements even though they inhabit
different environments. The environmental temperature is an important resource for ectotherms and
determines physiological traits. Parthenogenetic lizards of the cozumela complex were generated by two
independent hybridization events between the same gonochoristic species (mother species: Aspidoscelis
angusticeps and father species: A. deppii ). Therefore this complex it is an ideal model to determine if
the physiological requirements of the parthenogenetic lineages, originated by the same parental species,
are alike between them or among parental species. We determined the thermal efficiency index and
thermal preferences of the cozumela complex lizards ( A. cozumela, A. maslini, and A. rodecki ) and the
parental species in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico . Thermal efficiency indexes of all species were
determined by the thermal quality of the habitat and the precision of organisms to thermoregulate.
Thermal preferences of A. cozumela and A. maslini were similar to A. deppii ; however, thermal
preferences of A. rodecki were similar to the mother species. These results suggest that clones with
similar origin present different physiological traits between lineages and even among populations of the
same clone. However, the thermal preferences are phylogenetically conservative, at least with one of the
parental species, supporting the ―frozen niche variation‖ hypothesis.



Dickman, Christopher (University of Sydney);

Effects of habitat fragmentation on lizards of the Simpson Desert, central Australia

Spinifex grasslands predominate in the arid regions of central Australia, and provide habitat for some of
the world‘s richest assemblages of lizards. Although they are remote and generally subject to limited



                                                                                                          176
disturbance from people, the grasslands are subject to wildfires at intervals of 10 – 25 years that may
burn swathes of country exceeding a million hectares. Here, I describe the effects of a wildfire in the
Simpson Desert of central Australia that burnt for five months in 2001 – 2002 and fragmented the
grassland into patches ranging in area from a few square metres to >10 000 ha.

Post-fire surveys showed that the abundances, richness and composition of lizard assemblages were
largely unaffected in the immediate aftermath of the fire, but also that lizards declined after 1 – 2 years in
burnt compared with unburnt sites. Observations and experiments identified three causes of lizard loss in
burnt areas. The fire: 1) increased the susceptibility of lizards to free-ranging predators such raptors, lace
monitors and feral cats, 2) removed key habitat resources needed for shelter and thermoregulation, and
3) depleted invertebrate food resources. Initial declines in surface-active invertebrates were linked to
decreases or local losses of generalist lizards such as several species of Ctenotus , whereas longer-term
declines in termites appeared to drive reductions in numbers of specialist lizards such as Lerista labialis
and Rhynchoedura ornata . Some declines in lizard abundance and diversity were detected also in
unburnt sites; in accordance with predictions of island biogeographic theory, rates of loss were higher in
small patches of unburnt spinifex than in larger ones. Heavy rainfall in 2007 and again in 2010 – 2011 has
driven the recovery of spinifex in burnt areas, but current sampling shows that neither the abundances
nor diversity of lizards have reached pre-fire levels.

Climate projections indicate that central Australia will become hotter in future, but also that there will be
an intensification of ‗boom‘ and ‗bust‘ cycles that are driven by flood rains. These conditions will likely lead
to more frequent and extensive wildfires, in turn exacerbating the fragmentation of lizard populations and
assemblages. I discuss management options that should mitigate these effects.



Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Canada)

Development of the Pectoral Fin Spine in Acipenseridae (Actinopterygii: Acipenseriformes)


 Recent comprehensive studies on the anatomy and development of Acipenser brevirostrum and
Scaphirhynchus platorynchus have provided a wealth of information for comparative anatomical and
phylogenetic studies. These studies have also provoked numerous questions. One such question
involves the development of pectoral girdle and the formation of the pectoral fin spine, a proposed
synapomorphy for Acipenseridae. In this study we document the ontogeny of these regions and their
constituent components via developmental series for four species: A . fulvescens (30 – 170 mm TL), A.
medirostris (18-70 mm TL), A . transmontanus (19-131 mm TL), and S . albus 18-79 mm TL). Timing,
morphology, and pattern of development for the dermal bones, and pectoral fin spine among these
species are discussed and compared with other Acipenseriformes (e.g., a developmental series of
Polyodon spathula [15-120 mm TL] as well as other members of the family Acipenseridae). Additionally,
the ratio of fin spine length to total length is investigated to determine if ontogenetic changes occur in the
species examined. This study contributes to the ongoing character exploration for our studies of
phylogenetic relationships among acipenserids.




                                                                                                            177
Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Laumann, Katie; Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, Canada)

Nuclear DNA perspectives and problems in estimating relationships among sturgeons
(Acipenseriformes: Acipenseridae)

Genome duplication is a prominent feature in the evolutionary history of fishes generally, and subsequent
lineage-specific genome duplications have also occurred (e.g., within Catostomidae and Salmonidae), as
well as proposed reductions in genome size (e.g., Tetraodontiformes). Rarely, however, are polymorphic
polyploidy levels seen across a natural assemblage of species. As exemplars of this phenomenon
sturgeons (Acipenseridae) provide a model clade for investigation. In this study we examined this
polymorphic polyploidy phenomenon utilizing DNA sequence data from – normally – single-copy nuclear
loci from half of the recognized species in the clade; our taxon sampling encompasses all documented
levels of polyploidy within this family (i.e., 2n to 16n). These data are examined with reference to patterns
seen from multi-copy nuclear loci, or the repeated regions of the nuclear genome that have been used
previously (i.e., the Internal Transcribed Spacer and nuclear ribosomal DNA regions). The utility of these
loci in reconstruction of hypotheses of relationships among taxa is explored.



Dixon-MacCallum, Graham (University of Victoria);

Habitat preferences of snakes and lizards in urban parks in Victoria, British Columbia.

Urban parks are of value, not only to the people who visit them for recreation, but to wildlife that rely on
parks to survive. In Victoria, British Columbia, urban parks support three species of snake, genus
Thamnophis, and two lizards, Elgaria coerulea and Podarcis muralis, but the specific habitat preferences
of these species are poorly understood. The habitat available at medium- and small-scale in four parks
will be quantified, as will the diversity and abundance of reptiles in those parks. Medium-scale habitat
composition will be quantified using GIS software to determine the ratios of landcover types (e.g. forest,
field, wetland, or shrub), and the length of habitat edges. Surveys will be performed along randomly
chosen transects and all snakes and lizards encountered will be captured by hand. Small-scale plot-
based vegetation surveys will be performed at each capture location, and at a location 50 m away along a
randomly selected compass bearing. Comparison of habitat characteristics at capture points and paired
random points will allow inferences about habitat preferences of snakes and lizards. I expect that habitat
edge will be the greatest predictor of reptile abundance in urban parks in Victoria. Therefore, parks that
are more heterogeneous at medium- and small-scale will have higher diversity and abundance. This
study will help inform park managers for the creation and maintenance of urban parks where populations
of wildlife, including snakes and lizards, can persist and thrive.



Doan, Tiffany (Oicos Habitare);

Squamate Diversity Patterns in Peru and Bolivia

The South American countries of Peru and Bolivia are home to 5.7% of the world‘s squamates species.
As part of the Global Assessment of Reptile Distributions, I mapped the species distributions of all lizards
and snakes that occur in Peru and Bolivia. Peru contains 393 squamate species belonging to 19 families,
whereas Bolivia is home to 287 squamate species of 17 families. Endemicity was particularly high in
Peru, with 119 endemic species (30.3%); the number of endemic squamates from Bolivia was much lower
(28 species), representing just 9.8% of species. In Peru, lizards had a much higher rate of endemism



                                                                                                         178
than snakes or amphisbaenians, whereas in Bolivia, the rate was similar for lizards and snakes.
Coefficients of Biogeographic Resemblance demonstrated that Peru and Bolivia share the most similar
squamate fauna of South American countries, with 159 species in common. Peru was next most similar
to Ecuador, whereas Bolivia was second most similar to Paraguay. Species accumulation curves that
compared year of description with time demonstrate that for both countries there is no plateau, indicating
that novel species await description in both nations. Hotspots in Peru occur in Iquitos (122 species),
Puerto Maldonado (100 species), and the Urubamba Valley (95 species). Bolivian hotspots include Santa
Cruz de la Sierra (104 species) and Riberalta (59 species). After completion of snake and lizard species
maps, 59 species in Peru and 66 species in Bolivia were only documented in a single one-degree cell.
Eighteen one-degree grid cells in Peru and 21 cells in Bolivia did not contain any records of snakes or
lizards, which indicates that additional widespread sampling is necessary to fully describe the squamate
faunas of these countries.



Donaldson, Terry (University of Guam Marine Laboratory);

Species Diversity and Characteristics of a Parrotfish Spawning Aggregation Site

A number of species of parrotfishes (Labridae: Scarinae) form spawning aggregations that have
predictable spatial and temporal patterns. Spawning aggregations formed by these fishes are either
resident or transient in nature. Mating systems and behaviors utilized by these fishes range from lek-like
behavior of terminal-phase males with paired spawning, group spawning by immature-phase males and
females, sneaking by immature phase males during pair spawning of terminal phase males with individual
females, and group spawning by relatively large aggregations of individuals. At Guam, Mariana Islands,
parrotfish spawning aggregations may be found on reef terraces near promontories or reef drop-offs. The
species diversity of parrotfishes utilizing the same spawning aggregation sites varies but may include as
many as five species on a daily basis related to both tidal state and time period, with another species
participating during a specific lunar phase. Of spawning aggregation sites assessed thus far, 2-3
resident spawning aggregation species are usually most abundant with other species less so.



Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University); Shoo, Luke (Centre for Tropical Biodiversity &
Climate Change, Queensland, Australia); Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Corvallis, United States);
McMenamin, Sarah (University of Washington, Seattle, United States); Murray, Kris (University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia); Van Sluys, Monique (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio