estigations revealed that the spread of chytridiomycosis is the worst disease affecting vertebrate
biodiversity in recorded history and had caused the severe decline of up to 200 species of amphibians
globally with many of these now believed to be extinct (Skerratt et al 2007). Additional epidemiological
investigations have shown the key determinants of the disease‘s impact such as environmental
preferences (Murray et al 2009, 2011). These findings are now being used to estimate risk and guide
management in terms of surveillance, biosecurity and emergency response and as a framework for
investigation of other wildlife diseases and declines (Skerratt et al 2009).



Skipwith, Phillip (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley); Bauer, Aaron; Jackman, Todd
(Villanova University, Canada)

Phylogeography and Population Structure of the New Caledonian Gargoyle Gecko (Rhacodactylus
auriculatus)

Rhacodactylus auriculatus is a representative of a species-rich and morphologically diverse diplodactylid
gecko radiation endemic to the South Pacific island of New Caledonia.            This species is unique in a
number of behavioral, morphological, and ecological aspects. The recent discovery of R. auriculatus in
the northern province of the Grande Terre has increased the known range of this taxon, making it the
most widespread of the giant geckos currently assigned to the paraphyletic genus Rhacodactylus .
Phylogenetic analysis using concatenated mtDNA (ND2 + WANCY) and nucDNA (RAG1, MXRA5,
KIAA1549, KIF24, PDC) recovered two reciprocally monophyletic groups, a northern one comprising
individuals restricted to the northern ultramafic peaks and a southern assemblage containing all other
localities. Bayesian clustering analyses with S tructure support the presence of two populations with little
or no admixture. Dating analyses suggest that the two populations began diverging around 2.8 mya. The
relative isolation of the northern ultramafic peaks results in a high degree of structuring between sites in
the combined analysis and dating analyses support that this isolation occurred relatively early. The lack of
geographic structure within the southern population seen in the haplotype networks suggests that a
combination of widespread gene flow and incomplete lineage sorting may have played a role. This lack of
structuring may have been facilitated by historically continuous habitat in the southern province. The
divergence between the northern and southern clades as well as the structure seen within the northern
population may be linked to the fragmentation of suitable habitat during the Pliocene due to climate
change.




                                                                                                        665
Skutschas, Pavel (Saint Petersburg State University);

Mesozoic lissamphibians from Middle Asia and Siberia

Mesozoic terrestrial deposits are widely distributed in Siberia (central and Eastern part of Russia) and in
Middle Asia     (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and South Kazakhstan) and have
yielded diverse vertebrate faunas. Three groups of lissamphibians are known from the Mesozoic of
Middle Asia (albanerpetontids, frogs, and salamanders) and only two (frogs and salamanders) from
Siberia. Albanerpetontids are extremely rare in Mesozoic of Asia and their fossil record is limited to the
Cenomanian Khodzhakul and the Turonian Bissekty formations (Uzbekistan). Albanerpetontid from the
Khodzhakul Fm. Represents the first record of the genus Albanerpeton in Asia. In Siberia record of
Mesozoic frogs is limited to one taxon with possible discoglossid affinities from the Barremian?-Aptian
Khilok Fm. in Transbaikalia. In Mesozoic of            Middle Asia frogs are diverse and        are known
predominantly from the Khodzhakul Fm. (four taxa with uncertain affinities), Bissekty Fm. (numerous
names gobiatids and ―discoglossid‖ taxa some of which are obvious synonymous). Except these
geological units, rare and poorly definable remains of frogs are also known from the Cenomanian
Dzharakuduk Fm. and Turonian-Coniacian Aitym Fm. in Uzbekistan and Santonian Yalovach Fm. in
Tajikistan. Salamanders in Siberia are known from the Bathonian Itat Fm. in Krasnoyarsk Region (stem
salamander Urupia monstrosa and two undescribed taxa) and the Aptian-Albian Ilek Fm. in Kemerovo
Province (crown-group salamander Kiyatriton leshchinskiyi ). In the Jurassic of Middle Asia salamanders
are represented by Kokartus honorarius (Bathonian Balabansai Fm. in Kyrgyzstan) . The younger
record of salamanders from Middle Asia is restricted to only two Late Cretaceous salamander genera: b
asal crown group salamander with possible cryptobranchoid affinities Nesovtriton ( Turonian Bissekty
Fm. ) and cryptobranchid Eoscapherpeton (Cenomanian-Campanian, Khodzhakul, Dzharakuduk,
Bissekty and Aitym formations in Uzbekistan and Yalovach Fm. in Tajikistan). The composition of the
Late Cretaceous      lissamphibian    assemblages is different between Middle Asia and Euramerica:
albanerpetontids are rare in Middle Asia (in contrast to North America) and there is no evidence of any
salamander families that were common for Middle Asia (and whole Asia) and Euramerica.



Slimani, Tahar (cadi Ayyad University); Abderazzak, FATTAH (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of
Sciences, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, PO Box 3290, Marrakech 40 000,
Morocco, Canada); El Hassan, EL MOUDEN; Mohamed, RADI (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of
Sciences, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, PO Box 3290, Marrakech 40 000,
Morocco., Canada); Stefano, DOGLIO (Società Romana di Scienze Naturali, Ente di Ricerca Pura, via
Fratelli Maristi 43, ¿Villa Esmeralda¿, 00137 Roma (Italy), Canada)

Ecology and population parameters of Pseudepidalea brongersmai (Hoogmoed, 1972) living in
small temporary ponds in the arid area of Jbilets (Western Morocco)

Climate Change including more or less extended drought periods in arid environments may be one of the
major causes of animal populations decline. The object of this work is to study the population
demography and ecology of        Pseudepidalea brongersmai, a Moroccan endemic amphibian living in an
arid environment. The study was conducted in the central Jbilets (Western Morocco) during 4 years
(2008-2011). The relative abundance of the species in two nearby located temporary ponds (maximal
diameter of 4 and 6 meters, respectively) was 86 individuals. The adult sex ratio was close to 5.4 for
males. The average size of individuals was 43.8 mm (min: 35.5 mm to max: 48.1 mm), with an average
weight of 5.8g (min: 5g to max: 6.4g). The specimens with size between 40 and 45 mm represented over
53% of the sample. The study of the reproduction and behaviour activity provided us extensive
knowledge about the adaptation of this toad to an arid and unpredictable environment. In fact, there is a



                                                                                                       666
strong connection between this species phenology and the rainfalls: an early activity and reproduction
occurred immediately after the rains, apparently as an adaptation of this species to its constraining
environment (to optimize the chances of tadpoles survival). The diets of adults analyzed from faecal
contents and based on the occurrence frequency and          the relative number of prey showed that
Coleopteran and Formicidae constitute the dominant dietary items. This study has been supported by
the Hassan II Academy for Science and Technique – Project " ICGVSA".



Sloan, Leah (Humboldt State University); Marks, Sharyn (Humboldt State University, Canada)

Where Have All the Young Turtles Gone? Western Pond Turtle (Actinemys marmorata) Population
Health in Lentic Habitats along the Trinity River, California

As populations of a species decline, an understanding of the regional variation in population health can
aid in focusing conservation efforts. Over the past century Western Pond Turtle ( Actinemys marmorata
) populations have declined throughout much of their range (Baja California through Washington) as a
result of habitat loss, verexploitation, introduced species, and water course alterations.            The Trinity
River, in northwestern California, has been modified from its natural state by damming and flow
regulations; these alterations have decreased river quality for turtles.         We investigated the health of
Western Pond Turtle populations in alternative, lentic habitats adjacent to the Trinity River and its
tributaries using four indicators of population health: 1) age structure, 2) size structure, 3) adult size, and
4) growth rate of young turtles.       Of six lentic habitats sampled, four were biased towards large, old
turtles.    These habitats had prolific Bullfrog populations, while the other two sites lacked Bullfrogs.
Given that Bullfrogs will eat hatchling turtles, it appears that Bullfrogs are inhibiting turtle recruitment. The
same four lentic habitats also had turtles with faster growth rates and larger adult sizes, likely a result of
warmer water temperatures.           Overall, conservation efforts should focus on creating or preserving
ephemeral lentic habitats that dry in late summer; turtles and native anurans do not require permanent
water, but Bullfrog larvae usually take two years to metamorphose.



Smid, Jiri (National Museum); Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evollutionary Biology, Barcelona, Spain);
Gvozdik, Vaclav (Nationa Museum, Prague, Czech Republic); Kratochvil, Lukas (Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic); Moravec, Jiri (National Museum, Prague, Czech Republic)

Cryptic diversity of Arabian geckos of the genus Hemidactylus

The genus Hemidactylus includes over one hundred species, majority of which occurs in tropical Africa
and Indian subcontinent. The Arabian Peninsula is known to host 13 species, some of them described
very recently suggesting that overall diversity of these geckos in this particular region is still
underestimated. In our study we used material comprising more than 200 specimens densely covering
Oman, Yemen (including Socotra Island), UAE, Jordan as well as several localities from adjacent
Northwest Africa (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia) and Iran. Sequence data gained from up to four
mitochondrial (12S rRNA, ND4, tRNAs and cytochrome b) and four nuclear genes (RAG-1, RAG-2, C-
mos, MC1R) were used to infer the phylogenetic relationships among all known Arabian species from the
Arid clade species group. As our results suggest, the real diversity of Hemidactylus in Arabia is much
higher than ever expected. Analysis of mtDNA revealed about nine new main lineages (depending on the
level of accepted intraspecific variation), all of them were also clearly identifiable and supported by
nuclear data. Most of these new lineages inhabit mountain areas in northern Oman and southern and




                                                                                                             667
central Yemen. In addition, several oversea dispersal events of the gecko fauna across the Gulf of Aden
are reported.



Smith, Freya (Institute of Zoology); Durrant, Chris; Peniche, Gaby; Cunningham, Andrew (Institute of
Zoology, Canada)

Temporal Changes in the Prevalence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Temperate Mixed
Species Amphibian Assemblages

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) is an amphibian pathogen that has received global recognition as
a fundamental driver underpinning amphibian declines worldwide. Heralded by the Amphibian
Conservation Action Plan as ‗the worst infectious disease ever recorded among vertebrates‘ this
extraordinary organism is known to infect amphibians of over 450 species and can be found in almost
every habitat in which it has been sought. Taking into consideration, also, that amphibians are frequently
to be found within mixed species communities, this presents an enormous diversity of ecological systems
within which to study the epidemiology of this pathogen. In 2010 we undertook an intensive regime of
sampling at 8 mixed-species breeding sites in the UK, all of which had a history of infection with Bd . The
primary aim was to gain a greater understanding of Bd dynamics at system level, but with a wider goal
of identifying trends which might be more generally applicable. Specifically, our objectives were (1) to
identify differences in infection prevalence between UK species and (2) to identify differences in infection
prevalence through time. To achieve this, each of the 8 selected sites was surveyed on 5 separate
occasions during the breeding season (March-June). At each time point, the surveyor was tasked with
catching and sampling the maximum number of metamorphosed amphibians as was possible, within a 6
hour time frame. Samples for Bd were collected by swabbing the skin with a dry-tipped rayon swab and
were subsequently analysed using qPCR. In total, over 2,500 samples were collected, representing all 6
UK native species and 2 introduced species of amphibian. Primary analyses suggest a number of
significant results, including both temporal and species components of Bd infection. The final results of
this study will be presented and their implications for Bd surveys of temperate, mixed species amphibian
assemblages will be discussed.



Smith, Geoffrey (Utah State University);

Do habitat characteristics limit population densities of American alligators in Arkansas?

Abstract—Once threatened with extinction, American alligators have recovered across most of their
historic range.    Alligators reach the northwestern boundary of their range in Arkansas, where habitat
characteristics might limit populations.     Although low population densities have been dismissed by
managers as consequences of poor habitat, no habitat studies have been performed for alligators in
Arkansas. It is crucial that habitat requirements of alligators throughout the range be better understood
to protect this species from future population declines.        Towards this goal, we conducted habitat
assessments and population surveys for nineteen bodies of water within the known range of alligators in
southern Arkansas to determine which habitat characteristics were most important.            Nine habitat
characteristics, including depth, Secchi depth, canopy cover, vegetative cover, shoreline canopy cover,
shoreline vegetative cover, shoreline development, area, and corridor distance were incorporated into a
stepwise multiple regression model with alligator population density as the dependent variable for all
sites. Vegetative cover near the shoreline was the most important component of the model, followed by
distance to the nearest river corridor.    Although significantly higher population densities of alligators



                                                                                                        668
were observed at privately owned sites, subsequent analysis revealed no significant difference in
measured habitat variables between private and publicly owned sites.           Although the privately owned
sites displayed higher population densities on average, the significance was marginal.             However,
considering the measured habitat variables were not statistically different, there could be anthropogenic
factors limiting alligators on public lands that would have otherwise suitable habitat.



Smith, Gerald (University of Michigan); Carpenter, Nathan (College of Idaho, Canada)

Late Cenozoic Ancestors of Western U.S. Freshwater Fish Species

Fish species diversity of Mio-Pliocene western U.S. was higher than modern diversity because of wetter
climates at that time. Hydrographic isolation of drainage basins between barrier mountains in the Great
Basin and surrounding ranges blocked immigration; that isolation permits identification of many ancestors
of our modern western fauna. Species diversity was highest in the rift lakes on the Snake River Plain,
Idaho and Oregon. Later, drainage of those lakes decimated the fauna. We now have specimens of 35
genera and over 60 species scattered across 96 different formations and horizons in 10 western states.
Some genera are known back to 12 Ma and many of these possess traits more apomorphic than in their
recent descendants. Because lineages have dense records with age constraints they provide good
estimates of first appearance dates for molecular clock studies. These fossils provide interpretations of
past assembly of modern river drainages useful to geologists and biogeographers. They permit estimates
of rates of origination, extinction, and diversification. The morphological synapomorphies that diagnose
clades of ancestral cyprinids and catostomids call into question many molecular phylogenies that have
been misled by introgressive homoplasy. The most important perspectives offered by this fossil record
concern effects of climatic and environmental change on fish evolution.



Smith, Kieran (Florida Atlantic University Elasmobranch Research Lab); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida
Atlantic University Elasmobranch Research Lab, Canada)

Elasmobranch Bycatch Mitigation

Commercial longline fishing results in large amounts of incidental bycatch with elasmobranch fishes
(sharks, skates, and rays) constituting approximately 25% of the total catch. A variety of techniques have
been proposed to reduce catch rates of non-target species. Teleost species, like swordfish and tuna, lack
electrosensory systems so developing technologies which target the ampullary organs in sharks may
provide an avenue to selectively deter elasmobranchs without impacting the catch rate of target teleosts.
Lanthanide metals are extremely reactive when immersed in salt water and produce an electric field
detectable by the elasmobranch electrosensory system. The employment of lanthanide metals to reduce
shark bycatch has shown mixed results. It is therefore essential that these metals undergo further
investigation in order to properly determine their effectiveness as a tool for elasmobranch bycatch
mitigation. A controlled scientific longline study will be conducted to test the efficacy of the lanthanide
metal neodymium at reducing elasmobranch catch per unit effort (CPUE). Baited longline hooks will be
treated with neodymium and catch rates will be compared to that of controls. Preliminary data suggest
shark CPUE was decreased by 66% on neodymium treated hooks compared to untreated hooks,
whereas teleost catch rate did not differ. The effectiveness of neodymium varies among species with
significant reductions shown for blacktip ( Carcharhinus limbatus ) and Atlantic sharpnose sharks (
Rhizoprionon terranovae ) but less dramatic differences for other species indicating that interspecies
variability may exist. Galvanic interaction between the lead control and stainless steel leader created an



                                                                                                       669
electric field well within the range detectable by elasmobranchs. Based upon the large voltage produced
by dissimilar metals in seawater, we devised an alternative electrogenic stimulus. The juxtaposition of
two metals with different galvanic potentials creates in seawater an electric field nearly identical to the
lanthanide metals. Because a nearly identical voltage can be generated with common metals, producing
similar catch reductions at a fraction of the cost, this alternative technology is potentially a viable tool for
reduction of incidental shark bycatch in commercial longline fishing.



Smith, Krister (Senckenberg Museum);

Squamate historical phylogeography and Cenozoic climate change: Priming modern diversity
patterns

It is well known that climate change over the course of the Cenozoic Era was momentous. The Eocene in
particular was bounded by some of the most dramatic climatic shifts of the Cenozoic, beginning with the
rapid global warming of the Paleocene/Eocene Thermal Maximum and terminating with the global cooling
of the earliest Oligocene, a momentous shift that heralded the ice-house world of today. A variety of
studies have suggested that the cooling trend since the Eocene has led to a concentration of biodiversity
into the tropics, which may partly explain the latitudinal diversity gradient that is observed in almost all
major clades. However, direct paleontological data have rarely been brought to bear on this problem.

Recently elaborated techniques bring new insight to paleontological data. On this basis I have assembled
a data-set of Paleogene herpetofaunas to examine phylogeographic structure over time and to elucidate
the relationship between Cenozoic climate change and modern biodiversity patterns. The data-set
includes faunal assemblages deriving from different latitudes and spanning the Paleocene/Eocene and
the Eocene/Oligocene boundaries and incorporates phylogenetic relations. It is especially rich with regard
to iguanid lizards. Warming near the Paleocene/Eocene boundary appears to have resulted in a
northward dispersal of numerous lineages. This produced a comparatively homogeneous Eocene fauna
that persisted until the close of the epoch. Cooling in the earliest Oligocene then caused a retreat of
many, but not all, lineages toward the equator.

In addition to taxa with no close living relatives, mid-latitude Eocene faunas thus comprise two sets of
lineages: those whose extant members are restricted to megathermal parts of the world (the tropics,
roughly speaking), and those whose extant members remained in extratropical latitudes as climate cooled
and adapted to the harsher climatic conditions. The paleontological puzzle is still missing major pieces
and is thus far from complete. Still, it suggests the view that the basic composition of the modern tropical
and extratropical fauna of North Ameirca was set by late Paleogene cooling in addition to intercontinental
dispersal.



Smith, Leo (The Field Museum);

Evolution of the lachrymal saber with comments on the relationship between stonefishes and
scorpionfishes.

Recent anatomical investigations have identified a locking mechanism between the lachrymal and the
maxilla in stonefishes ( sensu lato ). This pawl-like linkage allows a substantive ventral spine on the
lachrymal to be projected laterally and locked out through rotation of both the lachrymal and maxilla. This
specialization also involves modifications to the cheek musculature and connective tissue. Through




                                                                                                            670
phylogenetic analysis, this feature is shown to be a synapomorphy of the stonefishes (Apistidae,
Aploactinidae, Eschmeyeridae, Gnathanacanthidae, Pataecidae, Synanceiidae, and Tetrarogidae). This
multi-system character provides support for the inclusion of Apistidae within this clade and the exclusion
of Congiopodidae from the stonefishes, as was shown in the molecular study of Smith and Craig (2007.
Casting the Percomorph Net Widely: The Importance of Broad Taxonomic Sampling in the Search for the
Placement of Serranid and Percid Fishes, Copeia 35-55). The limits, relationships, and taxonomy of the
Scorpaenoidei will be discussed in light of this new phylogeny.



Smolensky, Nicole (Texas A&M University);

Phylogeography of Dwarf Crocodiles (Osteolaemus spp.)

The dwarf crocodile, Osteolaemus tetraspis, is hunted throughout its geographic distribution primarily for
food and there is concern that this species cannot endure current harvest pressure. Moreover, there is
new evidence suggesting this species is part of a cryptic species complex (Eaton et al. 2009) making the
geographic distributions of Osteolaemus species uncertain. The Guineo-Congolian region is one of seven
regions of endemism containing mountain archipelagos and river basins that serve as biogeographic
boundaries for amphibian, bird and mammal communities. I test two alternative hypotheses that may
serve as a biogeographic divide among cryptic species of Osteolaemus. An extensive mountain range
along the Cameroon-Nigerian border may hinder gene flow among Osteolaemus species and thus serve
as a biogeographic boundary among the cryptic species. Alternatively the cryptic species may be sorting
by river basins. I collected tissues samples from Osteolaemus species on east and west side of the
Cameroon-Nigerian highlands and from the Ogoouè, Cross River and Congo River basins. Preliminary
evidence of the mitochondrial COI gene do not support the hypothesis that the highlands serve as a
biogeographic divide among cryptic species.



Snyder, Alexandra (University of New Mexico);

Curating and managing project-based collections of fishes

Fish specimens and data, curated by the Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB), are typically used in
studies conducted by state and federal agencies to monitor the status of New Mexico fish species and
aquatic conditions. The MSB plays key research and conservation roles in providing agency biologists
with important contemporary and historical data on New Mexico river basins and fish species. Agency
biologists annually contribute specimens and data to the MSB while conducting rare species risk
assessments, life history and ecological studies, and for ―Chain of Custody‖ evidence. These collections,
which are accessioned by the MSB at regular intervals throughout the year, present challenges in
conserving such an abundance of material. The MSB has developed curatorial protocols for collections
that have associated long-term aquatic microhabitat data, contain large numbers of specimens, tend to be
redundant in species composition, and are sometimes preserved for analyses other than morphometric.
This presentation will discuss deaccessioning cataloged specimens, techniques facilitating access to
primary and ancillary collections yet meeting requirements for long-term conservation, and a database
constructed for fish ecology studies.




                                                                                                       671
Snyder, Matthew (San Francisco State University);

Variation in Armor Reduction Among Coastal Populations of Threespine Stickleback

Threespine stickleback populations have repeatedly and independently evolved armor loss, including
reduced lateral plates and pelvic spine loss, in various freshwater environments. Armor loss has been
shown to be adaptive in these environments, and the genetic basis of both traits is known. Such variable
traits that are easily quantified provide excellent opportunities to examine the spatial scales and patterns
of morphological variation associated with specific habitats. Patterns of armor loss have been
characterized from lake and stream populations. However little is known about patterns of armor loss in
coastal and near-coastal fresh water or brackish water populations. In this study, threespine stickleback
populations in California were sampled from three coastal lagoons in San Mateo County, multiple sites
along the Russian River in Sonoma Sounty, and in Bodega Bay. Frequencies of individuals with high, low,
and partial plate morphologies were quantified using lateral plate counts of fish that have been stained
using an alizarin red staining procedure to make dermal bone easily visible. Coastal lagoon populations
exhibit variable frequencies of complete, partial, and low plate phenotypes between sites. In contrast to
many lake and stream populations, we did not observe any reduction or loss of pelvic spines in coastal or
river populations in this study. The local ancestral marine population from Bodega Bay showed only the
high plate phenotype. Interestingly, the frequency of high plate morphs decreased with distance from the
ocean in the Russian River, showing a clear trend towards a reduction in the ancestral lateral plate
phenotype correlated with increasing distance from the ancestral habitat. The genetic basis for both pelvic
spine and armor plate reduction is associated with several diagnostic substitutions in Eda , the gene of
major effect for lateral plate morphology. In order to understand the local genetic basis of phenotypic
variation, representatives from our samples were genotyped for Eda , confirming that local populations
posses a similar genetic basis for reduce armor morphology. This study informs our understanding of the
spatial scales at which phenotypic and genetic variation occur and the patterns of armor loss among
coastal and near coastal populations.



Snyder, Sarah (University of Nevada, Reno); Tracy, C. Richard (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada);
Nussear, Kenneth; Esque, Todd; DeFalco, Lesley; Drake, Kristina; Modlin, Andrew (U.S. Geological
Survey, Canada)

Assessing the impact of wildfire on desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) thermal biology

Recently, fires in the Mojave Desert have burned extensive portions of desert tortoise habitat. Changes in
vegetative cover and species composition of desert shrubs resulting from fire can be challenging for
tortoises as those vegetative elements are necessary to create the thermal heterogeneity used in
behavioral thermoregulation by these ectotherms. To assess the impact of wildfire on the thermal
environment, we quantified the thermal quality of burned and unburned habitat with respect to the tortoise
by developing a habitat quality index using operative temperature models. To determine whether
differences in habitat quality affect the thermoregulatory behavior of tortoises, we observed tortoise
behavior and measured body temperatures from temperature-sensitive data loggers attached to tortoises
residing within and outside of a fire perimeter. This enabled us to discern differences in daily activity time,
habitat usage, and body temperature patterns among tortoises in burned and unburned areas. Results
suggest burned habitat is of slightly lower thermal quality to tortoises than is unburned habitat, but
tortoises readily use both habitat types to thermoregulate effectively. Our study will help to direct
conservation efforts in restoring habitat of sufficient quality to maintain viable populations of the desert
tortoise.



                                                                                                           672
Solovyeva, Evgeniya (Lomonosov Moscow State University); Poyarkov, Nikolay (Lomonosov Moscow
State University, Canada); Dunayev, Evgeniy (Zoological museum of Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Canada)

Toad-headed agamas: some new insights on phylogeny of the genus Phrynocephalus (Agamidae,
Reptilia) inferred from mt and nuDNA markers

Phrynocephalus is a genus of agamid lizards with rather uncertain phylogeny. There are about 40 species
of Phrynocephalus (from 37 to 50 according to different opinions), they can be grouped in several species
complexes, but their phylogenetic relationships are still unclear. One of the main problems is the large
area of the genus, from Arabian Penninsula to NW China and from S Russia to Afghanistan. It is difficult
and almost unreal to collect samples of all existing species, so we used several species for one species
group. We studied 2 nuDNA gene fragments (1200 b.p. of RAG-1, recombination activating gene, and
1000 b.p. of BDNF, brain derived factor) and 3 mtDNA gene fragments (650 b.p. of COI, 1000 b.p. of ND2
and 900 b.p. of ND4), in total 4750 b.p., of more than 25 species. Maximum Likelihood and Neighbour
Joining trees where constructed on the base of separate and concatenated alignments. Several species
groups had valueble bootstrap for their monophyletic origin: viviparous chinese species, ocellatus-group,
helioscopus-group, versicolor-group and guttatus-group; Iranian and Arabian species in some analysis
splitted into two distinct independent groups. The position of Ph. mystaceus is floating on the
phylogenetic trees, but in all cases it doesn`t form a monophyletic clade with Ph. interscapularis and Ph.
scutellatus. Thus the subgenus Megalochilus previously proposed by several authors should be
considered unvalid. Basal position on the tree is occupied by Iranian and Arabian species. The recent
origin of guttatus and versicolor-groups also is supported.



Sonn, Julia (Tulane University); Chatfield, Matthew (Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, United States);
Robak, Matthew (Tulane Unversity, New Orleans, LA, United States); Richards-Zawacki, Corinne (Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA, United States)

Temperature and chytridiomycosis in Acris crepitans

Identifying which environmental features are most influential in the spread and virulence of emerging
pathogens can be critical to the prevention diseases. For example, high temperatures appear to
negatively impact the fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) and may be a strong limiting
factor that can inhibit the persistence of amphibian chytridiomycosis in certain habitats. We investigated
the effects of small differences in host body temperature on pathogenicity of Bd and the outcome of
infection in Northern cricket frogs (Acris crepitans), a species that is reported to be declining in the
northern part of its range. We chose six temperature treatments (14, 17, 20, 23, 26, and 29 °C) based on
the thermal range of the fungus and analyzed how these treatments affected the course of infection with
Bd. This experiment will provide insight into the influence of host body temperature on Bd infection,
which can be used to model the pathogenicity of chytrid fungus within living amphibian hosts. In addition,
to better understand the seasonality of Bd, body temperatures selected by wild Acris crepitans infected
with Bd were determined during a two year mark-recapture study in Belle Chasse, Louisiana, in which
frogs were sampled twice a month. We tested the hypothesis that 1) hosts exhibit behavioral
thermoregulation and that infected individuals choose warmer microclimates than uninfected individuals
2) that survival differs between uninfected and infected frogs even when clinical signs of chytridiomycosis
are absent and 3) that the opportunity for thermally-mediated defense from infection changes across
seasons. This study will help predict times and locations during which hosts are unable to reach body
temperatures needed to avoid or combat Bd, leaving them susceptible to declines and extinctions.




                                                                                                       673
These studies will also help determine the functional relationship between Bd pathogenicity, body
temperature, and immune response in ectothermic hosts.



Soorae, Pritpal (Environment Agency); Al Dhaheri, Shaikha (Environmental Agency, Canada)

Ecology and Chytrid Fungus Surveillance of two toad species from the United Arab Emirates

The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is a federation of seven Emirates, which lies in the north of the Arabian
Peninsula, and is a predominantly desert country with a hyper-arid climate. It has two toad species
namely the Arabian Toad ( Duttaphrynus arabicus ) and the Dhofar Toad ( Duttaphrynus dhufarensis ),
which are restricted to the mountainous north where there are wadis (seasonal river in mountainous
areas). The wild toad populations are mostly limited to the Northern part of the UAE which is mountainous
and has wadis (seasonal rivers in mountainous areas). A chytrid fungus baseline survey was done to
collect any baseline information on chytrid fungus presence or absence in the UAE due to the lack of
information on this fungus which has decimated amphibian populations worldwide. This survey also
generated useful information on toad distribution in the UAE.



Soorae, Pritpal (Environment Agency);

Guidelines for amphibian reintroductions and translocations

The IUCN/SSC Re-introduction Specialist Group (RSG) has embarked on a project to develop
Guidelines for Amphibian Re-introductions and Translocations . The RSG developed the IUCN
Guidelines for Re-introductions in 1995 which were later printed, translated and distributed widely in
1998. Since then the RSG has developed various taxon and species-specific guidelines such as for
Primates in 2002, African Elephants in 2003 and Galliformes in 2009. RSG also worked in conjunction
with the IUCN/SSC Rhino Specialist Group in developing re-introduction guidelines for rhinos in 2009.
Based on the success of these taxon and species-specific guidelines the RSG has embarked on an
initiative to develop specific guidelines for amphibian re-introductions and translocations. The aim of
these guidelines is to develop a ―one-stop‖ document that can provide amphibian re-introduction
practitioners with all necessary information on: Re-introduction terminology; feasibility, implementation
and post-release monitoring phases; disease issues such as chytrid fungus which are impacting
amphibian populations worldwide and the role of disease monitoring in re-introduction projects; and
Information on relevant organizations involved in all aspects of amphibians which have relevance to re-
introductions. We hope these guidelines when developed will provide amphibian re-introduction
practitioners with all the necessary information required to plan and conduct a successful re-introduction
project. The RSG is also updating its existing guidelines in relation to issues such as global climate
change so we hope to incorporate all the latest issues in the amphibian re-introduction guidelines.



Sós, Endre (Budapest Zoo); Molnár, Viktor (Budapest Zoo, Canada); Halpern, Bálint (MME BirdLife
Hungary, Canada); Walzer, Chris (Forschungsinstitut für Wildtierkunde und Ökologie, Canada); Tóth,
Tamás (Budapest Zoo, Canada); Péchy, Tamás (MME BirdLife Hungary, Canada); Lajos, Zoltán (Duo-
Bakt Veterinary Microbiological Laboratory, Canada); Gál, János (Szent István University, Veterinary
Faculty, Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Canada)

The role of the veterinarian in the hungarian meadow viper programme




                                                                                                      674
The veterinarian has a complex role in the Hungarian Meadow Viper [HMV, ( Vipera ursinii rakosiensis )]
program, including the implementation of screenings, treatments, diagnostic procedures, development of
new surgical techniques and evaluating of animal husbandry details. The paper deals with the medical
management of the whole conservation project and the most common diseases of the Eurasian
members of the Viperinae subfamily, giving examples mostly about our own cases (consisting the clinical
cases and health management of the HMV conservation program and several other Eurasian viper
species as these species support and strengthen our knowledge and skills for a successful conservation
project).



Sosa, Timothy (University of Chicago);

Patterns of ancestry and dispersal of Central American Characidae

This study explores patterns of ancestry in Astyanax (Characiformes: Characidae) and several related
genera. We used two mitochondrial markers (Cytb, CO1) and one nuclear marker (RAG1) to generate a
phylogenetic hypothesis. This builds on previous work in the Characidae and refines hypotheses of
ancestral range, patterns of dispersal and vicariance, and morphological evolution.



Sparling, Donald (Southern Illinois University);

Global Impacts of Contaminants on Amphbians

In California, USA, there is a pattern where coastal winds flow across the intensely farmed Central and
San Joaquin Valleys into the mountains. Pesticides from these valleys volatilize, are carried into
otherwise pristine montane areas, and are wet or dry deposited into ponds and meadows. These
pesticides can be joined by urban and industrial sources, also near sea level, and severely impact
amphibian populations. Studies by environmental chemists suggest that this low elevation usage/ high
elevation deposition of contaminants may be fairly common. This paper will report on the progress of a
meta-analysis to evaluate the occurrence of this low/high elevation pattern and to assess its risk to
amphibian populations at high (500-2500 m) elevations. In addition, other patterns of amphibian decline
relative to multiple stressors will be examined. The database will accumulate information from
AmphibiaWeb, Herpnet, FAO, and other reliable sources at the national, regional and species levels.
When available, national and regional levels data will include human population numbers, major crops,
amount of pesticides applied annually, geographical information, land use characteristics, etc. For those
species that have sufficient information, we will include IUCN status, distribution, elements of life history
and development, and other factors. Various modeling methods including informational analysis and
multivariate analysis will be used to address specific hypotheses.



Sparreboom, Max (NCBNaturalis Leiden);

Salamanders of the Old World - an Online Catalogue

Sparreboom, Max (2012). Salamanders of the Old World: an Online Catalogue. Electronic database
accessible at http://science.naturalis.nl/salamanders. This is an online catalogue that allows free access
to information on the natural history of the newts and salamanders of Europe, Asia and Northern Africa.




                                                                                                         675
The goal of the catalogue is to establish a ‗home page‘ for every Old World salamander species. Species
accounts are being added regularly, the first species entries were made in 2008. Publication in book form
is planned after completion of the catalogue in 2012. Salamanders of the Old World has been created at
the Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity Naturalis, Leiden, which hosts the website. The primary purpose
of Salamanders of the Old World is to provide a documented introduction to the salamander fauna of
Europe, Northern Africa and Asia. The catalogue is structured as follows. The descriptions are mostly
limited to external characteristics. Most species are depicted in colour. Eggs, larvae and the development
up to metamorphosed young salamanders are summarily described. The distribution maps follow the
latest maps published by IUCN (2011). Some of these maps were modified by Wouter Beukema and
myself. We agreed with IUCN to share the updated maps. Both aquatic and terrestrial habitat are
described. Altitude, climate, soil structure, presence of water and vegetation determine the character of
the habitat. Behaviour patterns are described, with an emphasis on reproductive behaviour. The main
threats to a species and its habitat are listed, following the IUCN (2011) definitions of Red List categories.
Much of what is known about salamander behaviour stems from observations in captivity made by
professional biologists in their labs and hobbyists in their terrariums. Most of the knowledge about
successful breeding of amphibians has been acquired by dedicated hobbyists. This paragraph cites
references to good first-hand reports of captive breeding in the hobbyist literature where this is relevant to
our knowledge of the species‘ biology.

Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity Naturalis, P.O. Box 9517, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. m-c-
sparreboom(at)hetnet.nl



Speaks, Justin (University of West Florida);

Photoperiod and Temperature Effects on Steroid Hormone Production and Dental Plasticity in the
Male Atlantic Stingray, Dasyatis sabina

Photoperiod and temperature are recognized as two of the most important environmental cues in
temperate freshwater and marine ecosystems. While manipulations of environmental factors, and their
relative control over reproductive physiology, have been studied in many teleost fishes, elasmobranchs
are not as well represented. The Atlantic stingray has a protracted and well-defined mating season
beginning in early Autumn and ending in late Spring, and can be observed in males not only by increases
of androgens, but by changes in dentition. In this experiment the proximate affects of temperature and
photoperiod on dentition and reproductive hormones were quantified in the Atlantic Stingray. It is
proposed that if photoperiod and temperature are the dominant proximate factors for reproduction in this
species, they should directly activate androgen production.       The increase in androgens following
gonadal recrudescence should, in turn, trigger the dental modification seen in mating male stingrays.
Results indicate that temperature is a strong proximate cue for onset of testosterone production in
laboratory studies, however wild samples indicated photoperiod plays an important role as well.
Laboratory animals showed the highest hormone response in treatments that simulated both decreasing
daylength and temperatures. High temperatures in the laboratory showed a distinct inhibitory effect on
testosterone production. Dental morphology displayed a trend of increasing percentage of samples with
cuspidate dentition as the wild population moved into the breeding season, following a period of
increased androgen production. Laboratory samples also responded in a similar fashion, although not as
clearly as the wild population. Samples with low testosterone levels over the course of the experiment
showed a higher percentage of molariform dentition, while those exhibiting increased testosterone had a



                                                                                                          676
higher percentage of cuspidate and transitioning dentition. This study further elucidates the influence of
photoperiod and temperature on gonadal recrudescence in an elasmobranch. It is the first experiment to
examine associations between circulating hormone levels and changes in dental morphology, a
secondary sex characteristic that has received little attention. This research should provide an impetus
to develop new lines of investigation into the discrete physiological mechanisms that control reproduction
in elasmobranch fishes.



Spear, Stephen (The Orianne Society); Stevenson, Dirk; Jenkins, Christopher (The Orianne Society,
Canada); Olson, Brita; Waits, Lisette (University of Idaho, Canada)

Conservation genetics of the threatened Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi) across
southern Georgia

The Eastern Indigo Snake is a large colubrid and is one of the most threatened snakes in North America.
They have among the largest home ranges of any snake, and have been known to make single
movements of greater than 20 kilometers. However, indigo snakes rely on intact longleaf pine
ecosystems, a habitat that is highly fragmented across the southeast, which likely reduces the ability of
snakes to move across the landscape. We collected over 250 scale-clip and shed samples across
southern Georgia to assess the current state of genetic diversity and gene flow in these populations. In
total, we collected samples from indigo snakes from 28 different sites, although the majority of individuals
were sampled from 7 sites, with the remaining sites represented by 1-5 individuals each. The sampled
sites represented two broad spatial clusters of populations that are largely separated by less suitable
habitat. The greatest genetic difference was between these two clusters, but we also detected significant
genetic differentiation within the spatial clusters, and a total of 4 genetic groups were supported. While
these clusters were generally explained by distance between sites, a sharp genetic discontinuity occurred
between two groups of sites less than 20 kilometers apart. An ordination analysis suggests this is due to
more recent subdivision and thus likely caused by human disturbance in the area, including a road.
Levels of heterozygosity were intermediate relative to other snake genetic studies. However, average
relatedness among individuals was relatively high (0.16), roughly equivalent to the levels expected among
first cousins. While it is likely that the strongest genetic differences are influenced primarily by distance,
the degree of genetic subdivision has increased due to recent fragmentation. Contemporary genetic
subdivision may then be responsible for the increased relatedness observed. Under this scenario,
genetic diversity would be expected to decrease and inbreeding depression could be a future concern.
Therefore, a combination of demographic, genetic, and habitat management is likely to be the most
effective conservation strategy for this species.



Spencer, Carol (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Cicero, Carla; Koo, Michelle (Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology, UC Berkeley, Canada); Rios, Nelson (Tulane University, Canada); Bloom, David; Wieczorek,
John (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley, Canada)

Lessons Learned from HerpNET and VertNet: Collaborative Georeferencing and Data Quality
Improvement in Natural History Collections

The main goal of VertNet and its associated projects (HerpNET, FishNet, MaNIS, ORNIS) is to make high
quality biodiversity data available online. These data come from natural history collections all over the
world, each with idiosyncratic database formats and textual-based locality information. Data have the
potential to be used in ways that were unforeseen when they were originally collected. The value of these



                                                                                                          677
data is directly related to its fitness for a variety of uses, and as data becomes more accessible, many
more uses become apparent. Georeferencing is one method to improve data quality. It is the process of
translating textual locality descriptions into geographic coordinates with their associated uncertainty, while
estimating the spatial extent of a locality. Through MaNIS, HerpNET and ORNIS, we developed
georeferencing standards, now known as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility‘s ―Guide to Best
Practices in Georeferencing.‖ From projects and workshops, we refined these methods, and we
developed and incorporated semi-automated tools, such as GEOLocate and BioGeomancer, into our best
practices. In this talk, I will present the results of past georeferencing efforts from HerpNET and VertNet,
give an overview of current collaborative automated georeferencing tools, and give our recommendations
for management of future georeferencing projects.



Spencer, Carol (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Cicero, Carla; Koo, Michelle (Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology, Berkeley, CA, United States); Rios, Nelson; Bart, Hank (Tulane University, Belle Chase, LA,
United States); Bloom, David (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Berkeley, CA, United States); Guralnick,
Robert (University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States); Wieczorek, John (University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, United States); Vieglais, David (University of Kansas, Lawrence, United
States)

Vertebrates in the Cloud: Are We There Yet?

The NSF-funded VertNet project ( vertnet.org ) brings together FishNet2, MaNIS, HerpNET, and ORNIS
into a single cloud-based platform for querying, visualizing, and annotating distributed vertebrate
biodiversity data. VertNet will combine the four vertebrate data networks into a single portal, making it
easier for researchers to aggregate and synthesize data across all vertebrates. VertNet will provide five
new and improved features, including: 1 - sustainable solutions (no local servers and fewer IT problems);
2 - improved performance and reliability (faster searching, better visualization, more mapping features); 3
- ease of discoverability (creating a thesaurus of synonyms for taxonomy and geography); 4 - data
improvement (enabling annotations from users, potential crowd-sourcing); and 5 - better integrations with
other projects (including Specify, Arctos, Map of Life, Encyclopedia of Life, AmphibiaWeb, and
iNaturalist). Development of VertNet APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) will be available to any
online project for searching and visualizing VertNet data. For example, the Map of Life project will use
VertNet APIs to display data points for species distribution maps while VertNet will display species range
maps generated by Map of Life. In addition to infrastructure development, VertNet has been very active
in outreach. Since January 2011, we have given six georeferencing workshops (in South Africa, Alabama,
California, and North Carolina) that have trained 129 people from 13 countries. A Biodiversity Informatics
Training Workshop held in June 2012 at Boulder, Colorado, trained an additional 25 students from 9
countries. We will work with institutions from existing networks over the next six months to put their data
in the cloud, and the new prototype VertNet portal will be functional within the year.



Sperry, Jinelle (University of Illinois); Michael, Ward; Weatherhead, Patrick (University of Illinois, Urbana,
IL, United States)

Use of Automated Radio Telemetry for Quantifying Behavior of Snakes

Radio-telemetry has dramatically increased our knowledge of the behavior of secretive wildlife, including
a large number of snake species. However, conventional manual tracking only allows intermittent
relocations and may affect the behavior of the tracked animals. Here we report on the use of automated
telemetry to continuously document snake behavior in Illinois and Texas, including comparisons of data



                                                                                                          678
collected for manual versus automated telemetry and the use of automated telemetry to document 24-
hour activity patterns. Automated telemetry data indicated that ratsnakes spent most of their time in small
home ranges (mean = 25 ha) but engaged in forays of up to 1.5 km away from and back to those core
areas, suggesting this species may engage in central place foraging. Depending on the frequency of
tracking events, manual tracking could miss these forays and drastically underestimate home range size.
Manual daily hand tracking produced reliable estimates of distances moved, but underestimated
distances by a factor of 4 when snakes were tracked every 5 days. We also found that snakes moved in
response to observers during hand tracking. Snakes in both Texas and Illinois exhibited nocturnal
behavior in every month of the active season. Nocturnal behavior was associated with temperature and
peaked during the warmest parts of the year. Automated receivers can greatly increase data obtained
from radio tracking snakes, providing novel insights unavailable from conventional hand tracking. There
are also drawbacks to this technology, some of which will vary among study species, so researchers
need to evaluate the appropriateness of the technology for both the species they are studying and the
questions being asked.



Spies, Brenton (California State University Northridge); Steele, Mark (California State University
Northridge, Canada)

Latitudinal variation in the early life history of the endangered tidewater goby, Eucyclogobius
newberryi

Variations in the environment have been found to strongly influence the life history of many marine
organisms that occur across with large latitudinal gradients. Species such as the endangered tidewater
goby ( Eucyclogobius newberryi ) persist in estuaries along the California coast that are highly seasonally
variable. This habitat preference may predispose them to local extirpation.          This study investigates
variations in the early life history of E. newberryi in relation to temperature trends found in eleven
habitats spanning approximately eight degrees of latitude.      Hourly temperature recordings were taken
from July-October of 2011 using ibutton thermocron data loggers. Newly settled individuals were collected
in order to determine how habitat variations affect pelagic larval duration (PLD), size at settlement, and
post-settlement growth rates.        Estuaries inhabited by E. newberryi showed high variability in
temperature with no latitudinal trend, likely due to factors such as estuary size, amount of freshwater
input, and duration of seasonal closure. Variations in all life history traits were found between high and
low temperature sites.       Fish that experienced colder temperatures had a longer PLD, slower post-
settlement growth rates, and were larger at settlement.



Squires, Kelly (Rescan Environmental Services Ltd.); Bol, Leslie (Rescan Environmental Services Ltd.,
Vancouver, BC, Canada); Buckman, Andrea (Rescan Environmental Services Ltd., Canada); Galvis,
Pedro (Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation, Canada)

Developing management guidelines from habitat thresholds for conservation of frog species

Species-habitat modeling and threshold analysis can be useful to quantify habitat quality, and thus to
derive management guidelines for species conservation. Habitat modeling identifies habitat variables
important to species, while threshold analysis can be used to identify limits along the gradient of important
habitat variables that separate marginal from ‗good‘ habitat. This approach to the measurement of habitat
quality is being considered to derive quantitative guidelines for the conservation and management of
selected frogs in the Dominican Republic where many extant frog species appear to be threatened. In



                                                                                                         679
2009 and 2010, amphibians were surveyed at 200 streams in the Dominican Republic along 100 m
riparian transects. Using Generalized Linear Modeling, the occurrence of 11 leaf litter ( Eleutherodactylus
spp.) species and 5 aquatic-breeding species were related to local-scale aquatic and riparian vegetation
variables. Threshold analysis was performed using segmented regression and maximally-selected rank
statistics. The probability of occurrence for leaf litter species was highest above a threshold of 70% shade
and 70% leaf litter cover. On average, 5.17+ 4.65 more leaf-litter frogs were counted along transects with
bromeliads and other vegetation with phytotelmata, an important resource for leaf litter species. These
results suggest that while abandoned cacao plantations with shade trees that cover much of the
Dominican Republic likely provide adequate shade and abundant detritus for leaf litter species, such
areas may not provide habitat of similar quality to mature forests where bromeliads are usually more
common. Factors that influenced the occurrence of aquatic-breeding frogs were more variable among
species. Thresholds were found in water temperature, canopy cover, and vertical vegetation structure for
aquatic-breeding species. Frog species richness was highest above 45% percent cover of leaf litter, 55%
shade, and a canopy height of 17 m. While high amounts of shade, leaf litter, vegetation structure, and a
tall canopy are characteristics of older forests, these features can also be realized in young and early
seral tropical forests when disturbance has been limited.



Sredl, Michael (Arizona Game and Fish Department);

Calibrating our progress towards recovery of amphibian populations: an area-based approach
and occupancy modeling.

Like many amphibian species worldwide, the Chiricahua leopard frog ( Rana                  [ Lithobates ]
chiricahuensis) experienced a dramatic, rangewide decline during the past three decades and was listed
under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) in 2002. A species recovery plan was finalized in 2007 that
included four recovery criteria that, when reached, will have: 1) established sufficient populations and
metapopulations, 2) managed the necessary aquatic breeding habitats, 3) managed important dispersal
corridors, and 4) reduced threats so that the Chiricahua leopard frog no longer needs the protection of the
ESA. Although great progress has been made since federal listing, progress on recovery criterion 1 has
been hampered by 1) the dearth of suitably configured landscapes that could ―host‖ candidate
metapopulations and 2) the difficulty of establishing and monitoring stable and viable metapopulations
given the limited human and financial resources available.            I develop a conceptual area-based
approach to calibrate progress toward recovery that is applicable to the Chiricahua leopard frog that
utilizes occupancy modeling to gauge progress in establishing, managing, and monitoring viable
metapopulations. This approach is easier to design and implement, makes fewer assumptions, and is
less biased than the current ―strict metapopulation‖ approach and is applicable to other patchily-
distributed amphibians.



St. John, Wendy (Sonoma State University);

Spaciotemporal Patterns of Nesting Behavior in a Northern California Population of Western Pond
Turtles

We conducted field observations on a population of western pond turtles ( Emys marmorata ) living in a
semi-permanent vernal lake in Lake County, CA in the month of June for 4 consecutive years (2008 –
2011). Females were captured for morphometric data collection, marked with a unique scute identification
notch and palpated to detect if they were gravid. Gravid females were tracked visually and/or with radio



                                                                                                        680
telemetry during terrestrial forays to potential nest sites in well-drained upland areas NE of the lake. We
recorded GPS coordinates for all successful nesting attempts. Estimates were made of percent ground
cover and canopy cover at each nest location. Nests were constructed between 2 and 300 meters from
the edge of the pond, in relatively exposed areas covered with annual grasses. Analyses of this multiple-
year database of nesting activity indicate a percentage of nesting females in this population of E.
marmorata may exhibit nest site fidelity, with several individuals returning to nest in the same location in
multiple years. These turtles also appear to show a strong preference for nesting in relatively exposed
areas within 10 m of the tree line. We also analyzed other nesting behaviors, including distance traveled
from pond, and microhabitat selection and its effect upon hatchling success and sex ratios. These
findings have importance for conservation of this species, as well as other species with temperature-
dependent sex determination (TSD). E. marmorata requires upland areas for nesting adjacent to aquatic
habitats, and understanding the ways in which this species uses upland areas, and how changing global
climates may effect reproductive patterns has important implications for resource management and
species conservation.



Stabile, Jennifer (Albuquerque Biological Park);

The Role of Zoos in Amphibian and Reptile Reintroductions

Zoological institutions and aquariums have come a long way from the stigma as a road side attraction.
Many of these facilities are now leaders in captive conservation programs. With recent declining
population trends concerning both amphibians and reptiles, maintaining a collection developed to sustain
a species over time for use in a conservation program may play an integral role in minimizing this loss to
biodiversity. Combining ex situ assurance colonies with local partnerships for future repatriation efforts
may contribute to the overall success of both species survival strategies. Factors to address before
beginning any captive program include environmental qualifications, genetic variability, partnership
development with stakeholders, and long term management of populations. Only with willing and active
participation along with combined resources from all branches of conservation can we create a pro-active
response.



Stachowski, Marisa (Southeastern Louisiana University); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Phylogeography of Ilyodon: a Taxonomic Nightmare Indeed

The viviparous fish genus Ilyodon (Goodeidae) is endemic to west-central Mexico in basins of the Pacific
Slope. The genus has been the subject of several taxonomic, genetic, and evolutionary studies due to
complexities among morphotypes. As many as five species are currently recognized: Ilyodon furcidens ,
I. whitei , I. lennoni , I. xantusi , and I. cortesae . The widespread distribution of the genus, the disjunct
status of many of the species, as well as the long-standing taxonomic confusion in the genus warrant
further systematic and taxonomic investigation. Therefore, we conducted a range wide phylogeographic
study of Ilyodon and investigated the monophyly of the putative species in the genus. Preliminary
phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial DNA recovered two monophyletic clades that correspond to the I.
furcidens group, inclusive of I. furcidens and I. xantusi and the I. whitei group, inclusive of I. whitei ,
I. lennoni and I. cortesae . Sequence divergence between the clades was low (&lt;2%) and there was
minimal structure within each of the clades, which suggests little support for the other named species of
Ilyodon .        Although it was previously thought that Ilyodon furcidens and I. whitei were mutually



                                                                                                          681
exclusive in terms of distributions, haplotypes from the Rio Balsas basin were distributed within each of
the clades, rather than solely in the I. whitei clade as was expected. These results suggest that a
taxonomic revision of the group many be warranted.



Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinios University, DeKalb, IL,
United States); Bekker, Kent (Toledo Zoo, Toledo, OH, United States)

12 Years and Over 12,000 Snakes Served: Volunteer Assistance with the Annual Population
Census of the Lake Erie Watersnake, Nerodia sipedon insularum

Delisting of the Lake Erie watersnake resulted from annual monitoring which demonstrated that the
Population Persistence criterion of the Lake Erie watersnake recovery plan had been met. Monitoring was
heavily dependent on efforts of volunteers participating in intensive population censuses each spring and
less intensive efforts throughout the active season. Volunteer effort was restricted to sampling (capture
effort only) while quantitative measurements (e.g. body size, color pattern, stomach contents) were taken
by principle investigators to ensure data quality and consistency. During a decade of annual censuses
(2002 – 2011), more than 140 individuals participated (9 – 68 per year, mean = 27). Most volunteers
participated during just a single year and often for only a single day but many (35%) participated during
multiple years (range = 2 – 10, mode = 3.4). In decreasing order of frequency (weighted by years of
participation), volunteers included graduate students, zoo professionals, undergraduate students, regional
herpetological society members, federal agency professionals, university professionals, area residents,
state agency professionals, regional naturalists and consultants, and high school students. Professional
affiliations of volunteers included 20 colleges &amp; universities, 5 state agencies, 5 zoos, 3 regional
herpetological societies, 3 regional nature centers and forest preserves, and 2 federal agencies. The use
of a diverse group of volunteers provided an opportunity for direct community involvement (locals were
encouraged to participate and learn about recovery objectives),           an increase in the efficiency of
sampling (experienced volunteers provided guidance for novices),        an increase in the number of sites
sampled simultaneously (experienced volunteers were able to lead teams independent of primary
investigators) and an increase in the number of individual snakes captured during the census (number
of captures correlates with number of volunteers). The combination of coordinated volunteer efforts,
outreach opportunities and data collection enhanced our ability to achieve rapid recovery of this snake.



Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, Canada)

A detailed analysis of survival in the Lake Erie watersnake, Nerodia sipedon insularum

 Mark-recapture data from 7888 individuals (5792 adults and 2096 sub-adults) spanning 28 years was
used to analyze survival and recapture parameters for the Lake Erie watersnake, Nerodio sipedon
insularum . Listed as threatened in 1999 under the U.S. Endangered Species Act, this snake was delisted
due to recovery in 2011. Data were parsed into subsets for separate multi-model analyses using
maximum likelihood methods (Program MARK: CJS &amp; Pradel) to 1) determine whether survival had
increased following a rapid shift in diet, 2) identify sources of temporal and spatial variation in survival, 3)
provide estimates of sub-adult (neonate and juvenile) survival and 4) provide current estimates of adult
survival and population growth for use in demonstrating recovery. Although data from early in this study
(1980-1983) are limited, comparisons at one site (North Bass Island) indicated that survival has increased
by 17% in males (from 28% in 1980-1983 to 45% in 1996-2008) and 4% in females (from 66% in 1980-
1983 to 70% in 1996-2008), providing evidence that watersnake populations have benefited from a shift



                                                                                                            682
in diet. Analysis of recent data (1996-2008) showed that spatial variation was an important factor in Lake
Erie watersnake adult survival, both among islands and among sites within islands. Sex was also found to
influence survival, but with no clear pattern; male survival was higher at some sites and female survival
was higher at others. In an effort to obtain survival estimates for younger age-classes, 1674 neonates
were wire-tagged immediately after birth and released. The use of TSM (time since marking) models
revealed that the inferred age of a snake did influence survival within a single site, increasing from 18%
as neonates, to 21-53% as juveniles before reaching adult levels (60-78%). Using data from the 8 best
sampled sites over 8 years, the realized population growth rate varied temporally (range: 0.90 to 1.21). A
random effects model using these data yielded estimates of mean adult survival of 74% (s 2 =0.024) and
mean population growth rate of 1.07 ( s 2 =0.014) and provide a baseline for comparison during the 5
year post-delisting monitoring period.



Stanley, Edward (Richard Gilder Graduate School);

Evolutionary patterns of ecology and biogeography in the Cordylidae

The Cordylidae is the only squamate family endemic to sub-Saharan Africa and comprises 80 species of
rupicolous, arboreal and fossoreal lizards. The majority of the phylogenetic and ecological diversity
occurs in Southern Africa, although the family‘s range extends to Northern Angola and Ethiopia. Previous
comparative and historical biogeographic analyses of the group has been hindered by poorly understood
phylogenetic relationships, but following a recent systematic revision of the family, comparative analyses
are now possible.

Utilizing the biogeography programs LaGrange and DIVA in conjunction with an updated phylogeny,
strong support is recovered for a Southeast African origin of the family. The ancestral platysaurines are
revealed to have a northern distribution within this range, while the Cordylinae are shown to have a
southerly distribution, dispersing into southwest Africa, with two lineages subsequently radiating to East
Africa. Ecological niche modeling reveals a strong relationship between distribution and reproductive
strategy, supporting the hypothesis that a shift from oviparity to viviparity resulted in the colonization of
higher latitudes. Ancestral state reconstructions of habitat type show that a shift from rupicoly to
arboreality coincides with northerly radiations in two cordyline lineages.



Starkey, Michael (SAVE THE FROGS!); Kriger, Kerry (SAVE THE FROGS!, Santa Cruz, CA, United
States)

Inspiring The Next Generation To Care About Amphibians

Currently only a small proportion of our society knows that amphibians are disappearing. This lack of
awareness in the general public is one of the greatest impediments to successful amphibian conservation
efforts, as most of the threats to amphibians could be ameliorated if people were aware of the effects of
their actions. Therefore, it is critical that scientists increase their efforts to educate and motivate the next
generation of humans to care about amphibians. SAVE THE FROGS! is America‘s first and only public
charity dedicated to amphibian conservation. One of our primary goals is to provide and distribute high
quality amphibian educational materials that enable teachers and students to teach and learn about
amphibians and the problems they face. The SAVE THE FROGS! website (www.savethefrogs.com) has
over 250 pages of information, including freely downloadable slideshows, webinars, fact sheets, posters,
and great ideas on how to engage people in amphibian conservation efforts. We coordinate the annual



                                                                                                            683
SAVE THE FROGS! Poetry and Art contest, which have received thousands of entries from over 30
countries. These contests are a simple and effective way to engage children in appreciating amphibians.
As part of our work with SAVE THE FROGS, we regularly give presentations on amphibian conservation
at universities, schools, government agencies and public interest groups. As part of the San Francisco
Tadpole Headstart Program (www.savethefrogs.com/sf-tadpole), we have spoken to over 3,000
schoolchildren at 30 San Francisco schools. In these presentations we educate students about the role of
amphibians in our fragile planet and inspire them to care for the planet. As San Francisco is the frog legs
eating center of the western hemisphere and as San Francisco‘s politicians have actively lobbied against
and vetoed pro-frog legislation, this program helps ensure the next generation of San Franciscans do not
actively harm amphibian populations. It is our duty as scientists to protect amphibian populations, and this
will not be possible unless we rapidly and successfully educate the public about the amphibian extinction
crisis. Whether we are conservationists, pathologists, or ecologists, we need to stand together by
reaching out to the next generation and inspire them to care about amphibians.



Starnberger, Iris (University of Vienna, Austria); Poth, Dennis; Schulz, Stefan (Institute of Organic
Chemistry, TU Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany); Vences, Miguel (Division of Evolutionary Biology
Zoological Institute Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany); Walzl, Manfred
(Department of Integrative Zoology, University of Vienna, Wien, Austria); Hödl, Walter (Department of
Evolutionary Biology, University of Vienna, Wien, Austria)

Multimodal Signaling in African Reed Frogs: Attraction through calls, colors and chemical cues?

During calling the vocal sac serves anurans as an air reservoir, in minimizing the loss of sound energy
and in distributing calls omnidirectionally. The vocal sac‘s role beyond acoustics has been largely
neglected in the past. The diversity in vocal sac coloration and shape found in different anuran species is
striking to the human observer and recently the vocal sac‘s role as visual cue has gained vast attention.
Males of many reed frog species (Anura: Hyperoliidae) have a prominent colorful patch on their vocal sac,
which gains in conspicuousness once the vocal sac is inflated. To date, the function of this gular patch
remains unknown.

Histological analysis indicates that the gular patch is a gland extending into the vocal sac cavity. We
suggest that this gland, which exceeds 10 times the thickness of the vocal sac skin, produces volatiles
emitted while calling. Furthermore, the coloration of vocal sac and gular patch might be species specific
and serve as visual signal component in calling males. First results of an explorative study integrating
histological and biochemical analyses, spectrometry and behavioral experiments to investigate signal
modalities and their role in intra- and intersexual communication will be presented.

We propose that reed frogs use a complex combination of acoustic, visual and chemical signals in
species recognition and mate choice.



Stayton, C. Tristan (Bucknell University); Siegel-Richman, Yonaton (Bucknell University, Canada)

Variation in the material properties of turtle shell bone: preliminary investigations on the plastron
of Trachemys scripta

Physical defense against predation is one of the most important functions of the turtle shell. Predator-
induced loads (as would be produced during a predator‘s bite, for example) interact with the geometry of
the turtle‘s shell to producing variable, yet partially predictable, stresses which shell bone must resist.



                                                                                                        684
Given this, along with the variety of parts protected by the shell, it is reasonable to predict that there will
also be variation in the strength of the skeletal materials that comprise a turtle‘s shell. We tested such
predictions on the shell bone of Trachemys scripta elegans . Plastrons from 5 individuals were removed
and sectioned into 1cm x 1cm specimens. These specimens were mounted and scutes were removed.
Material properties of the bone were assessed using microindentation techniques. In these tests, a
minute cono-spherical probe (2.5 µm radius) was rapidly lowered onto the surface of the shell bone,
stressing and eventually breaking the material. The force at breaking, along with the dimensions of the
probe, was be used to calculate the strength of the bone for that particular specimen. We found a
consistent pattern of high strength in three areas of the turtle plastron: the anterior midline, the center of
the plastron, and along the anterior and posterior margins of the bridge. We suggest two non-exclusive
explanations for this variation. First, this variation might be adaptive – bone might have evolved to be
stronger in the vicinity of highly-stressed regions of the shell or external to vital areas such as the head or
heart. Second, this variation might be a consequence of shell developmental patterns. Data are currently
not available to support either of these hypotheses. However, we note that increased strength in the
anterior and posterior margins of the bridges is consistent with a mechanical explanation for increased
shell strength. These regions develop the highest stresses produced in the turtle shell under a variety of
loading regimes (including many that mimic predator bites observed in nature), even taking into account
the greater thickness of shell bone in these areas. Higher bone strength would allow those regions to
more successfully resist high stresses and prevent failure of the shell as a whole.



Steen, David (Auburn University);

Reptile Restoration in Fire-suppressed Longleaf Pine Sandhills

The once-extensive longleaf pine ( Pinus palustris ) ecosystem of the southeastern United States has
been reduced to a fraction of its historic extent. A fire-adapted system, many remaining fragments have
been fire-suppressed and invaded by hardwood trees, particularly oaks ( Quercus spp.). This change in
species composition alters the habitat and is to the detriment of wildlife assemblages associated with
longleaf pine forests. Fire surrogates and prescribed burning have been suggested as potential
management strategies to restore fire-suppressed and hardwood-invaded longleaf pine forests to target
conditions; due to the unique effects of fire, it is generally suggested that prescribed burning should follow
application of any hardwood removal treatment. To determine how fire surrogates followed by prescribed
burning affected wildlife populations and assemblages, we sampled for reptiles within 20 experimental
sites and six reference sites. Experimental sites were initially subjected to either mechanical hardwood
removal followed by fire, herbicide application followed by fire, prescribed burning alone, or remained in a
fire-suppressed state (i.e., controls). Following initial treatment, all sites experienced over a decade of
prescribed burning on an approximately two-year interval. We evaluated the effects of a given treatment
by comparison of wildlife populations and assemblages on treatment sites to those on reference sites
initially and also after over a decade of prescribed burning. If conditions associated with a given treatment
were indistinguishable from those of reference sites, we considered this as evidence that management
objectives were met. Initially, reptile assemblages within treatment sites treated with prescribed burning
alone were most similar to those of reference sites; fire surrogates did not immediately provide an
observed benefit. At the conclusion of the study, reptile assemblages at all sites were indistinguishable
from those on reference sites except for assemblages on sites treated with herbicide, suggesting
herbicide application was relatively ineffective at restoring reptile assemblages. A mark-recapture study of
the six-lined racerunner ( Aspidoscelis sexlineatus ) also identified prescribed burning as effective.
Initially, abundances on sites treated with prescribed burning alone, as well as on sites treated with
mechanical hardwood removal followed by fire, were comparable to abundances within reference sites.



                                                                                                           685
Over time, abundances at all sites were comparable to those on reference sites. Overall, effective
restoration of reptile populations and assemblages in fire-suppressed longleaf pine sandhills was
achieved and prescribed burning over approximately a decade was generally sufficient to achieve this
result. In general, there was little observed benefit or need to employ fire surrogates prior to prescribed
burning.

Stehmann, Matthias F.W. (ICHTHYS Laboratory);

Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881), a NE Atlantic deepwater composite skate species

Storm prepublished without figures in 1881a note on Raja nidarosiensis Collett (nov. sp. in lit.), based on
correspondence with Collett. Collett himself published in 1882 the full description of Raja nidrosiensis as
a new skate from Trondhjem Fjord, along with good plate drawings of his three syntypes (immature male
138 cm, two females 181.5 and 191 cm TL). Cannas et al. published online in early 2010 molecular and
morphological evidence of the occurrence of Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881) in the Mediterranean
Sea, based on 14 specimens taken from the deep Sardinian Channel at 600 to 1420 m depth. These
measured 240 to 1482 mm TL, including 9 adult females and the adult male of 1180 mm TL. The habitus
photographs by Cannas et al. (2010) of a female 100 cm, a young male 24 cm and the mature male 118
cm TL from off Sardinia raised the author‘s doubts about the correct identity of these specimens. The
author had seen D. nidarosiensis from the northern North Atlantic and reported in the literature, and these
showed a quite different habitus and were of markedly larger size of more than 2 metres, with beginning
sexual maturity at a size even somewhat larger than the maximum size of the Sardinian specimens.
Iglésias (2009) had published on D. batis Linnaeus being a composite species of a very large D.
intermedia and a much smaller D. flossada, just like with D. nidarosiensis. When contacted, Iglésias wrote
to eventually have found D. oxyrinchus to also be a composite species with two forms of different size.
And he confirmed to have provided the Sardinian colleagues tissue samples of D. nidarosiensis for their
comparative DNA analyses. He also confirmed to only know as D. nidarosiensis from French catches and
landings in and from southern Rockall Trough the smaller form of the Sardinian morphotype, but he had
never seen the larger, probably more northern morphotype. Agreement of DNA analyses of his samples
and the Sardinian specimens was thus explained. Both morphotypes will be demonstrated, along with
some contradictions in Collett‘s description, and the different geographical range of both D. nidarosiensis
forms. It looks like, instead of fomerly three Eastern North Atlantic species of Dipturus, we have to deal
now with six species, with wide ranging consequences for fishery management and conservation
measures.



Steinberg, David (Duke University); Leal, Manuel (Duke University, Durham, NC, United States)

Heads-up: signal modulation and receiver distance in anoline lizards

The fluid nature of the spatial relationships of individuals in a habitat presents a challenge for
communication because signal efficacy is sensitive to distance, particularly for signal components that
serve to attract the attention of potentially inattentive receivers. Therefore, it has been predicted that
selection should favour the evolution of signalling strategies that allow individuals to overcome the impact
of changes in inter-individual spacing. We evaluated this prediction by measuring the physical properties
of movement-based, head-bob displays given by the lizard Anolis gundlachi during staged social
encounters under natural conditions. Individuals of A. gundlachi modulated the maximum amplitude of
head-bob displays in response to changes in signaller-receiver distance. The observed changes in
amplitude were in accordance with predictions of a biologically-based motion detection model; changes in
amplitude are predicted to result in more effective stimulation of the receiver sensory system. Our findings



                                                                                                        686
strongly suggest that modulation of the physical properties of motion-based signals can be an effective
mechanism to tune signals to the combined effects of characteristics of receiver sensory systems and
receiver distance, and can serve as a behavioural strategy to overcome problems associated with
changes in the spacing of individuals.



Steinfartz, Sebastian (University of Bielefeld); Hendrix, Ralf (University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany);
Reinhardt, Timm (Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Magdeburg, Germany); Caspers,
Barbara (University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany)

Ecology, genes and behaviour: an integrative perspective of adaptive divergence in fire
salamanders

The adaptation of individuals to new or differing environmental conditions is one of the most promising
processes to identify and investigate underlying mechanisms that are of major importance in the context
of population divergence and speciation. Environmental adaptation leading to adaptive divergence can
have many facets. Here, we are focusing on an ecological, genetic and behavioural integrative
perspective of an adaptively diverging salamander population in Germany. Our ongoing study nicely
demonstrates that starting from an ecological perspective, i.e. the adaptation of salamander larvae to
different larval habitats, adaptive divergence of this population can be detected with neutrally evolving
DNA markers at a population genetic level. Behavioural approaches now investigate in how far mating
preferences have evolved as a consequence of habitat dependent adaptation enforcing genetic
differentiation. On the genome level, we are now focusing on the identification of possible genes that are
differentially expressed in the two distinct larval habitat types. Our research results demonstrate that
amphibians might be ideal study systems to explore the consequences of habitat adaptation on
population differentiation and possible speciation as an integrative approach.



Steinfartz, Sebastian (University of Bielefeld);

Speciation in amphibians and reptiles: from patterns to processes and mechanisms

Classically and rather successfully, speciation processes in amphibians and reptiles have been mainly
inferred from a phylogenetically and/or pattern (phylogeographically) driven perspective.    Although this
general approach has been successful to identify general species diversity and major patterns how
species are spatially distributed, we are missing approaches that are focused on processes and
mechanisms that underlie speciation in amphibians and reptiles. This talk is aimed to provide an overview
on classical speciation approaches and their outcomes and would like to point out promising approaches
that are combining the phylogenetic/phylogeographic perspective with the processes/pattern driven
approach in speciation research of amphibians and reptiles.



Stengle, Anne (University of Massachusetts); Tyning, Tom (Berkshire Community College, Pittsfield, MA,
United States); Sievert, Paul (University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United States)

What is normal? Observations of a possible secondary disease process in northeastern timber
rattlesnake (crotalus horridus)




                                                                                                         687
Populations of Timber Rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus) have become increasingly fragmented in the
northern and western portions of their range during the past two centuries. Observations of widespread
infections and/or facial lesions in some northeastern populations have been suggested to be the result of
decreased population size, reduced genetic variation, and/or increased summer rainfall. To determine if
snakes with facial lesions showed behavioral differences in habitat use and movement patterns,
compared to uninfected animals, we monitored both groups using radio-telemetry in western
Massachusetts. In addition we recorded the prevalence of infections/lesions in five populations based on
direct observations and analysis of shed skins. We defined lesions as any injury or infection affecting
15% or more of the face. Lesion rates in five separate Massachusetts populations ranged from 5.6% to
26.7%, with all lesions being found on males. Biopsies were conducted on the lesions from10 New
England snakes and were found to contain ? species of fungi and ? species of bacteria, none of which
were considered to be primary pathogens. Male timber rattlesnakes with (N = 4) and without (N = 7)
lesions, tracked using radio telemetry, showed no difference in mean body mass, maximum home range,
minimum distance moved from den, or activity range length. All snakes followed more than one year
gained weight. Habitat use by snakes with and without lesions did not differ, as shown by a repeated
measures ANOVA. Prevalence of disease, and possible causative agents, are rarely reported for free-
ranging snakes. We encourage others to report their findings on disease prevalence in rattlesnakes
measured at the center and periphery of the range. Even though we did not detect significant effects of
lesions on the physiology, behavior, or survival of timber rattlesnakes, we urge caution in interpreting
these results due to our small sample sizes, and the tendency of snakes with lesions to move shorter
distances. In addition, conservation strategies involving the translocation of individuals between
populations should be carefully reviewed in order to reduce the possibility of disease spread.



Stephens, Jeff (Oakland University);

Anthropogenic changes to litter composition affect fitness traits of a larval amphibian

Human activities, invasive species introductions and climate change have significantly altered the
composition of native forest plant communities in North America.           These changes to the terrestrial
landscape have altered the composition of leaf litter in woodland pond habitats, whose nutrients can be
subsidized by this litter. The consequences of such changes for ephemeral ponds and the organisms
they harbor, such as amphibian larvae, are largely unknown.                 In this experiment, we utilized
mesocosms to assess how ten species of allochthonous litter, that differ in their regional abundance and
chemical composition, affect ephemeral ponds, particularly larval amphibian fitness traits, including
metamorphic mass, larval period and survival.       We found that litter had dramatic effects on larval wood
frog fitness traits and on multiple facets of the mesocosm ecosystem, including water chemistry and
phytoplankton and periphyton biomass.       Litter from green ash, a species of tree that has dramatically
declined in parts of the eastern United States due to the emerald ash borer, caused frog larvae to grow
larger, develop faster, and have greater survival than larvae from the other litter treatments.
Interestingly, we found that three invasive wetland plant species produced heavy metamorphs, with
shorter larval periods and higher survival relative to non-invasives.      Litter from red maple (which has
become one of the most abundant tree species in the eastern United States), cattail, and sedge produced
metamorphs that were significantly smaller and had lower survival relative to the other species examined.
Mass at metamorphosis was best explained by litter quality (carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous content)
and primary producer biomass, while survival and larval period were best explained by a combination of
litter quality, primary producer biomass, and water chemistry (polyphenolics and pH). Additionally, we
found that litter quality and primary producer biomass was related to differences in the elemental
composition of metamorphs. Lastly our data suggests that litter nitrogen may be a limiting resource and



                                                                                                        688
facilitates the export of metamorphic frog biomass. Combined, our results indicate that changing plant
communities, leading to qualitative changes in allochthonous input, have great potential to affect
amphibian fitness.



Stewart, James (Southeastern Louisiana University);

Testing Subspecies Delimitation of Dekay's Brownsnake, Storeria dekayi, using Ecological Niche
Modeling

Dekay‘s Brownsnake, Storeria dekayi, has a widespread geographic distribution, ranging from Quebec
south to eastern Mexico and an isolated population in Honduras and Guatemala. Currently, seven
subspecies are recognized, varying in color patterns and morphological characteristics. These
characteristics make them difficult to identify, especially in areas where these groups overlap. Subspecies
designation is problematic empirically and philosophically. Using a combination of Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and Ecological Niche Modeling (ENM) the subspecies of S. dekayi will be tested.
Geographic Information Systems have provided more data in ecology and biogeography studies as well
as ways to manipulate those data. Ecological Niche Modeling takes spatial data of a species with the
known habitat and environmental requirements to form models that allow for analysis of actual or
predicted range distributions. Incorporating this type of modeling coupled with the Ecological and
Evolutionary Species Concepts will enable testing putative niches of subspecies of S. dekayi. The
Ecological Species Concept will be used as the operational concept where unique niches will be
interpreted to reflect unique lineages. These unique lineages under the Evolutionary Species Concept
would be interpreted as species. ENM previously has been used as an effective technique to learn more
about an organism‘s habitat and to assist in species delimitation. By combining known presence data and
ecological parameters, ENM will be used to test the reality of the subspecies of Storeria dekayi.



Stewart, James R. (East Tennessee State University); Ecay, Tom W (East Tennessee State University,
Johnson City, United States); Heulin, Benoit (CNRS, Paimpont, France)

Calcium Mobilization by Embryos of a Viviparous Lizard, Zootoca vivipara, Incubated ex utero

Females of the viviparous European common lizard provision eggs with calcium from two sources, yolk
and uterine secretion. Yolk calcium (0.17 mg) contributes only 26% of neonatal calcium content (0.65
mg). A thin eggshell containing 0.08 mg of calcium is secreted soon after ovulation. Eggshell calcium
content increases to 0.24 mg prior to the embryonic growth phase and remains stable throughout
gestation. Embryonic mobilization of calcium from either yolk or uterine secretions primarily occurs late
in development. Embryonic calcium uptake is correlated with expression of the calcium binding protein,
calbindin-D 28K , in the chorioallantoic membrane. As embryos gain mass, calbindin-D 28K expression
and embryonic calcium content increase, likely in response to increased uterine secretion of calcium.
Coordination of uterine secretory capability with competence of embryos to acquire calcium is a critical
component of placental function. Neither the timing of uterine secretion, nor the developmental pattern
of the embryonic response to calcium availability, is known.     We surgically removed embryos from
females and incubated them in either, 1) nominally calcium-free saline or 2) saline with 2 mM calcium, to
determine 1) if embryos can conserve calcium in the absence of exogenous calcium and 2) if the
mechanism of embryonic calcium uptake is continuously responsive to calcium availability.            We
analyzed total calcium in egg compartments using atomic absorption spectroscopy at the initial time point
(embryonic stage 36 – 37) and after 11 days of incubation (embryonic stage 40).            The incubation



                                                                                                       689
medium was replenished every two days and we measured calcium concentration in the recovered
medium with a calcium electrode. There was no difference in total calcium in the initial sample of eggs
and in day 11 eggs in calcium-free saline, but calcium mass was significantly greater in eggs incubated in
2 mM calcium.     Embryos in either treatment lost calcium on day two of incubation. Beyond day 2,
embryonic calcium content was stable until day 10 - 11 when embryos in 2 mM calcium gained significant
calcium from the medium. We conclude that embryos have the capacity to conserve calcium in the
absence of exogenous calcium and that embryonic response to exogenous calcium is dependent on
embryonic maturation during the ultimate embryonic stage.



Stewart, James R. (East Tennessee State University); Russell, Kylie J.; Thompson, Michael (University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia)

Development of the Yolk Sac in an Oviparous Scincid Lizard, Oligosoma lichenigerum

Development of the yolk sac of squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes) differs from other amniote lineages
in the pattern of growth of extraembryonic mesoderm, which generates an enclosed space, the yolk cleft,
within the yolk sac cavity. Function of the yolk cleft is unknown, but variation in this structure contributes
importantly to variation in extraembryonic membrane development of oviparous species and in placental
structure among viviparous lineages.             We used light microscopy to describe the yolk sac in a
developmental series of the oviparous scincid lizard, Oligosoma lichenigerum .            Development of yolk
sac splanchnopleure, surrounding the yolk sac cavity, and initial stages in formation of the yolk cleft are
typical compared to other lizards. During later development, the yolk cleft is transformed into a novel
structure, a tube-shaped cavity with a cuboidal germinal epithelium. Yolk splanchnopleure is composed
of endoderm and mesoderm supplied by omphalomesenteric blood vessels.                  Intravitelline mesoderm
contributes the epithelium of the yolk cleft.       Throughout development, the epithelium of the yolk cleft
generates cells that reside initially in the yolk cleft. In contrast to non-squamate amniotes, three types of
cells occur among yolk platelets within the yolk sac cavity.            One of these is structurally similar to
endodermal cells lining the yolk sac splanchnopleure; the other two are smaller and contain vesicles,
which give the cytoplasm a granular appearance. Distribution of the granulocyte-like cells suggests that
the yolk cleft epithelium is the source.          Granulocyte-like cells associate with endoderm and blood
vessels along the yolk sac splanchnopleure and throughout the yolk sac cavity and aggregations of these
cells occur in regions of fluid and low yolk platelet density late in development.         These observations
suggest that the yolk cleft epithelium is a type of myeloid tissue that produces granulocyte-like cells that
contribute to yolk digestion and perhaps immune defense.                Given that the yolk cleft is unique to
squamate reptiles, it is likely that a novel system of yolk digestion and mobilization evolved in early
squamates, or lepidosaurs, and that monotremes, turtles and archosaurs retain the basal amniote
pattern.



Stiles, Jimmy (Auburn University Department of Biological Sciences); Stiles, Sierra; Guyer, Craig (Aubun
University Department of Biological Sciences, Canada); Godwin, James (Auburn Universtiy
Environmental Institute, Canada)

Monitoring the Reintroduction of Eastern Indigo Snakes into Alabama: Survival and Home Range

A program to reintroduce Eastern Indigo Snakes (Drymarchon couperi) to the Conecuh National Forest
(CNF) in southern Alabama is currently underway. Monitoring of snakes will be important for elucidating
important variables affecting the establishment of a viable population of D. couperi. Snakes have been



                                                                                                           690
released on CNF for the last 3 years. A proportion of these snakes were outfitted with surgically implanted
radio transmitters. Radio telemetry techniques and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are being
used to monitor the success of this reintroduction. Two strategies are being employed to release the
snakes. One release technique (hard release) consists of releasing snakes directly onto the site where
they are allowed to move freely across the landscape. ―Soft‖ releases employ the use of 6 enclosures
approximately .5-.75 hectares in size. One or 2 snakes were released into the enclosures then allowed to
disseminate, spending (5-121 days) in the enclosures. We are evaluating this technique to determine if
penning the reintroduced snakes decreases active ranges and improves survival. This talk will focus on
radio telemetry data gathered from snakes released in 2010 and 2011. Home ranges of snakes were
calculated using three different methods: Minimum Convex Polygons, Kernel Density estimators, and
Adaptive Local Convex Hulls. Preliminary analysis supports the hypothesis that penning of snakes
decreases their active ranges once they left the enclosures. We are also using the home range data to
compare areas of overlap between males and females. Understanding how penning affects male-female
overlap will be important to determining the effectiveness of soft releases in influencing reproduction.
Reproduction in the wild will be a key component to the overall success of the reintroduction program.
Survival rates of the snakes being monitored by radio telemetry is also important for determining the
effectiveness of hard and soft release techniques on establishment of a viable population. Kaplan-Meier
estimates for censored data suggest a survival rate of approximately 50% for reintroduced snakes, with
female snakes having a dramatically higher survival rate than males. Cox Proportional Hazards Models
were used to evaluate the two release techniques and determine if the soft release technique is
beneficial. While home ranges do appear to be decreased for the soft release snakes, survival rates
appear to be higher for hard released snakes. Using survival estimates and home range data to compare
the effects of hard and soft release strategies is helping us to elucidate which methodology is best suited
for reintroductions of D. couperi.



Stiles, Sierra (Auburn University Department of Biological Sciences); Stiles, Jimmy; Guyer, Craig (Aubun
University Department of Biological Sciences, Canada); Godwin, James (Auburn Universtiy
Environmental Institute, Canada)

Shelter Use by Translocated Eastern Indigo Snakes (Drymarchon couperi) in Conecuh National
Forest, Alabama

Reintroduction has become an increasingly popular conservation method for reestablishing extirpated
populations of declining species. One measure of success for this method, in the short term, is habitat
use that mirrors that of individuals from the source populations. We radio-tracked 38 Eastern Indigo
Snakes translocated to Conecuh National Forest, Alabama to evaluate post-release habitat use. Conecuh
National Forest lies in the northern extent of the geographic range of Drymarchon couperi. Previous
studies of this species in the northern part of its range have indicated that shelter availability may be a
potent environmental constraint. In particular, Eastern Indigo Snakes in this part of their range are
documented to rely chiefly on gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) burrows for shelter. Translocated
Eastern Indigo Snakes in our study used shelters in a manner similar to snakes studied previously near
the source site. Our observations indicate that maintenance of high quality gopher tortoise habitat,
including prescribed burning will be critical for reestablishing Eastern Indigo Snake populations in this part
of their range.




                                                                                                          691
Stöck, Matthias (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of Lausanne, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland); Betto-Colliard, Caroline (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore,
University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, Canada); Dufresnes, Christophe (University of
Lausanne, Switzerland); Savary, Romain (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of
Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, Canada); Bonato, Luico (Dipartimento di Biologia, Università
di Padova, via Ugo Bassi 58b, I-35131, Padova, Italy, Canada); Kornilios, Panagiotis (Section of Animal
Biology, Department of Biology, School of Natural Sciences, University of Patras, GR-26500 Patras,
Greece, Canada); Lymberakis, Petros (Natural History Museum of Crete, University of Crete, Knosos Av.,
P.O. Box 2208, GR-71409 Irakleio, Crete, Greece, Canada); Novarini, Nicola (Museo di Storia Naturale di
Venezia, Santa Croce 1730, I-30125, Venezia, Italy, Canada); Pio, Dorothea (Environmental Sciences
Unit, UNESCO Jakarta, Jalan Galuh II No 5, Kebayoran Baru, Jakarta, Indonesia, Canada); Sicilia,
Alessandra (Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, University of Palermo, Via Archirafi, 18, I-90123 Palermo,
Italy, Canada); Turrisi, Guiseppe Fabrizio (University of Catania, Cutgana, Section of Nature Reserve
Management, via Terzora 8, I-95027 San Gregorio di Catania, Catania, Italy, Canada); von Ungern-
Sternberg, Alexander; Perrin, Nicolas (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of
Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, Canada)

Comparative analyses of secondary contacts in three hybrid zones: Data on four anuran lineages
from the same radiation in relation to divergence time

Speciation research in amphibians can rarely compare secondary contacts of differently diverged
lineages from the same radiation. We study four lineages of green toads ( Bufo viridis subgroup) around
the northern Mediterranean Sea, diverged during different Plio-Pleistocene periods. Using mitochondrial,
and nuclear DNA, we examine divergence times, and interactions with up to 12 autosomal and sex-linked
microsatellites. Sicilian endemic B. siculus and Italian mainland-origin B. balearicus (divergence 2.7
Mya) form a narrow (40 km) hybrid zone in NE-Sicily with limited bidirectional mtDNA introgression.
Nuclear genomes barely admix, and hybrid breakdown occurs in backcrosses (Colliard et al. 2010, BMC
Evol. Biol. 10: 232). Selection against hybrids likely has intrinsic genomic causes, possibly reinforced by
adaptation to climate, as ecological niches overlap just 38%. Thus, B. siculus and B. balearicus have
evolved almost complete reproductive isolation. In contrast, Italian B. balearicus and SE-European B.
viridis , diverged only 1.9 Mya, display a wider (130 km) zone of mtDNA introgression and considerable
nuclear admixture (40 km) in the Po Plain. Ecological niche models identified overlap between parental
and hybrids‘ space, and their distributions not matching climatic gradients. Instead, rivers (Po, Adige)
pose strong dispersal barriers. The best-fitting neutral scenario presents a 5 kya paleo-river shift that
isolated frontline balearicus to the north of the modern Po, where colonizing viridis introgressed,
leading to advanced nuclear admixture, while female-biased dispersal led to greater introgression of
balearicus mtDNA into the viridis gene pool. Alternatively, mtDNA &gt;&gt; nuDNA introgression might
indicate intrinsic selection, in accordance with Haldane‘s rule for male heterogamety (XY) (Dufresnes et
al ., in review). The third hybrid zone (work in progress) involves Balkan and Central European viridis
and Asia Minor-origin variabilis (divergence &lt;1.8 My, most recent split) along the SE-shores of the
Balkan Peninsula. A uniform mtDNA lineage of variabilis has colonized the viridis glacial refugium
(harboring several mtDNA haplotypes) from the East. Nuclear admixture stretches &gt;200 km. Our study
supports the predicted inverse relationship of divergence and natural hybridizability of young lineages
from the same radiation, and facilitates dating incipient speciation, which is particularly under-investigated
in amphibians.




                                                                                                          692
Stock, Melanie (University of Wisconsin - Madison); Balster, Nick (University of Wisconsin - Madison,
Madison, WI, United States)

Overwintering of American Toads (Bufo americanus) under differences in soil temperature

Amphibians using belowground hibernacula, such as the American Toad (Bufo americanus), rely on a
specific range of soil temperatures to maintain metabolic demands throughout winter. However, few
studies have examined the effect of overwintering stress on the fitness of these amphibians, especially
within urban landscapes where temperatures are typically elevated relative to rural environments (i.e.
urban heat islands, UHI). We hypothesize that elevated urban air temperatures may decrease the
thickness of soil surface insulation (snow) and increase soil temperature fluctuations, therefore, causing
urban toads to emerge in spring with lower body masses than rural toads. To test this hypothesis, we
designed two field studies (observational and experimental) that house a total of 25 American Toads at
three sites in Dane County, WI, where soil temperature, air temperature, and frost depth are recorded. In
our observational study, we established five toads at a rural site and five toads at an urban site to
compare the loss of body mass over winter, timing of emergence in spring, and variation in year round
abiotic factors between the two environments. In our experimental study, we are quantifying the loss in
body mass as well as the depth of belowground hibernacula of 15 toads across three soil temperature
regimes that are maintained by altering the presence and thickness of insulation at the soil surface (e.g.
snow, straw). In our observational study, we expect greater differences in soil temperature and frost depth
at the urban site due to greater variation in snow accumulation, which may in turn elevate metabolic
demands, decrease body fat content, and increase winter mortality rates compared to toads overwintering
under less variable temperature regimes at the rural site. In our experimental study, we expect to
measure shallower hibernacula and less fat loss in toads as the thickness of surface insulation increases
across treatments. As urbanization continues to modify natural habitats, toads may serve as a proxy for
understanding the overwintering patterns of amphibians within these anthropogenic landscapes and
improving the conservation of these fossorial species.



Stockwell, Michelle P (University of Newcastle); Clulow, John; Mahony, Michael (The University of
Newcastle, Canada)

Chytrid management scenarios from models of host population dynamics: costs vs benefits

Infectious diseases of wildlife can be some of the most challenging threats to manage due to difficulties in
identifying causal relationships between infection, disease and population decline. It is only through an
understanding of infection outcomes on the vital rates that drive host population size that its impact can
be quantified and effective targets for management determined. This study uses multistate models of
mark-recapture and radio-tracking data to quantify the impact of chytrid ( Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
) infection on survival and transition probabilities in a green and golden bell frog ( Litoria aurea )
population over a 12 month period. These parameter estimates were then used to model host population
dynamics over time under different management scenarios and each was evaluated under a cost-benefit
framework. The results reveal that counteracting the negative effects of chytrid on host survival probability
by increasing recruitment rate and survival via management of non-disease related threats, may be more
effective at increasing host population persistence than attempting to reduce transmission and disease
directly. Given that conservation resources are often limited, such comparisons of management scenarios
may assist in identifying and prioritizing actions, particularly if the complexities and costs associated with
each scenario are also incorporated.




                                                                                                          693
Stokes, Amber (Utah State University); Ray, Andrew (United States Geological Survey, Canada);
Buktenica, Mark (Crater Lake National Park, Canada); Gall, Brian; Paulson, Dale; Paulson, Elva; French,
Susannah (Utah State University, Canada); Brodie III, Edmund (University of Virginia, Canada); Brodie,
Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada)

Tetrodotoxin levels in high elevation populations of Taricha granulosa in Oregon and predation by
otters

Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is a low molecular weight neurotoxin that is found in a wide variety of taxa. TTX
blocks voltage-gated sodium channels, preventing the propagation of action potentials, inducing
paralysis. Death is typically due to asphyxiation. Taricha granulosa have been known to possess TTX
in high quantities and only have one positively identified predator, Thamnophis sirtalis . However, recent
observations of predation events on T. granulosa by otters were documented in a high elevation
population just outside of Crater Lake National Park in Oregon. Given this observation, we quantified
TTX levels in this population of T. granulosa as well as three other populations within Crater Lake
National Park and compared them to one another. Additionally, we compared these three populations of
newts to one from a very toxic population in Benton County, Oregon.



Stoler, Aaron (University of Pittsburgh); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States)

Tadpoles as litterbugs: assessing the influence of leaf litter chemistry and diversity on larval
anurans in artificial wetlands

Forest wetlands are important for a wide variety of amphibians that spend their larval stage in these
environments. The chemistry of leaf litter entering these wetlands is a major determinant of bottom-up
resource supply and can modify environmental conditions.                Although litter chemistry varies widely
among plant species, the effects of this variation on amphibian growth and development remain largely
unknown. We investigated the effects of litter species, chemistry, and diversity on larval anurans in two
studies using artificial wetlands. In a 4-month study using large, outdoor mesocosms, we hypothesized
that responses to 10 common tree litter species would be correlated with four broad aspects of litter
chemistry: lignin, phenolic, soluble carbon, and nitrogen content.          To understand how mixtures of leaf
litter species with similar or contrasting chemistry influence larval anurans, we conducted a second
mesocosm study where we hypothesized that greater diversity would result in faster development and
larger growth. We found dramatic effects of individual litter species on anuran survival and metamorph
mass.      For both spring- and summer-breeding anurans, phenolics and soluble carbon were strong
determinants of survival and metamorph biomass. Indeed, survival of American toad ( Bufo americanus
) was as low as 20% with litter species that produced highly soluble carbon.              For summer-breeding
anurans, we found additional correlations with lignin content. Results were due to a combination of litter
chemistry, litter-induced changes in abiotic conditions, and community interactions. Although we found
strong effects of individual litter species, we found few effects of litter chemical diversity. However, post-
hoc analyses suggest that diversity of some chemical attributes more strongly correlates with responses
than others. Together, these studies provide a wealth of new insight regarding the effects of riparian
diversity on larval anurans, at a time when forest diversity and species composition is highly threatened.




                                                                                                           694
Stoot, Lauren (Carleton University/University of Ottawa); Cairns, Nicholas (Carleton University/University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Cooke, Steven (Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Blouin-
Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Consequences of incidental capture of freshwater turtles in commercial fisheries

Commercial fisheries are an important industry in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Although the
majority of catches consist of targeted species, a percentage of annual global catches are non-targeted
organisms. Bycatch is the capture of non-targeted species and frequently occurs in commercial fisheries.
Captured individuals are exposed to a wide range of stressors. Interactions with fishing gear can cause
both acute and chronic issues influencing the health, condition, and behaviour of the individual. In
extreme cases, animals may die. Many vertebrate groups are at risk of being captured as bycatch
including fish, mammals, reptiles and birds. Recently, greater efforts have been made to quantify and
prevent bycatch. Most efforts have been directed towards marine ecosystems with relatively little research
and attention devoted to freshwater. Freshwater turtles are frequently encountered as bycatch in fyke-net
fisheries in eastern Ontario. Typical setting techniques can result in trapped individuals being exposed to
anoxic conditions for up to seven days. Although freshwater turtles tolerate anoxic conditions during
hibernation, their ability to withstand prolonged submergence decreases as water temperatures increase.
This is concerning as most commercial fishing activity occurs during the spring and fall. Turtle mortality
associated with bycatch is a conservation concern due to their at-risk status and life-history
characteristics including delayed maturation and high adult survivorship. The purpose of the current
study is to test three turtle species for the presence of acute and chronic physiological and behavioural
consequences of capture in commercial fishing nets. We simulated stressors that captured turtles would
experience and measured physiological parameters on three typically encountered turtle species. Our
work showed that entrapped individuals displayed considerably higher blood lactate and lower blood pH
values compared to free-living control individuals. Moreover, entrapped turtles had reflex impairments
that were not apparent in control turtles. We will use biologging techniques to monitor turtles post-release,
assessing the behaviour and survival of captured individuals. Collectively, this research along with
associated fishing gear modification projects will clarify the role of fisheries interactions in the
conservation biology of turtles.



Straube, Nicolas (College of Charleston); Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, United
States); Ebert, David (Pacific Shark Research Center Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Moss Landing,
CA 95039, CA, United States); Corrigan, Shannon (College of Charleston, charleston, United States); Li,
Chenhong (College of Charleston, Charleston, Canada); Rochel, Elisabeth (College of Charleston,
Charleston, SC, United States); Leslie, Robin (Branch Fisheries Management, Department of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries, Roggebaai 8012, South Africa)

A molecular approach to estimate the etmopterid species-diversity off South Africa.

The cold waters of the Benguela current on the South African west coast and the subtropical warm
temperate waters of the Agulhas current on the east and south coasts in conjunction with the suitable
habitat afforded by the Agulhas and Mozambique plateaus, are believed to be the primary factors driving
high shark species diversity off South Africa. One of the most speciose families of squaliform deep-sea
sharks is the Etmopteridae (Lantern Sharks). An estimated 13 species of etmopterids have been reported
from South African waters. The phylogeography and taxonomy of these species is debated in current
literature, as some etmopterids show a wide distribution range contrasting more locally distributed
species. Here, we present mtDNA analyses using the NADH2 gene (ca. 1000bp), applied to an extensive
South African etmopterid sampling. Preliminary results indicate the presence of at least one cryptic cold-




                                                                                                         695
water species formerly referred to as Etmopterus cf. granulosus, as well as an unknown warm water
species from the Etmopterus lucifer clade. We further discuss results in a phylogeographic context, i.e.
presence of widespread species questioning the validity of some South African etmopterids considered
endemic.



Straube, Nicolas (College of Charleston); Corrigan, Shannon (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC,
United States); Li, Chenhong (College of Charleston, Charleston, United States); Rochel, Elisabeth;
Rosana, Kerri; Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, United States)

Putting some jaws on the Tree of Life: Taxon-rich estimates of elasmobranch phylogeny based on
mitochondrial and nuclear DNA markers

Exploring patterns and processes of evolutionary change in the elasmobranch fishes may be critical to
understanding vertebrate diversification and success. The elasmobranchs hold an important position in
the gnathostome tree because they are basal, sister to the Osteichthyes while also showing similarities
with the mammals in terms of genome organization. In spite of this importance, and widespread
fascination with sharks among the scientific and general communities, we know relatively little about the
interrelationships among constituent members of the group. To date, most molecular based estimates of
elasmobranch phylogeny have been based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data. While such estimates
are useful, they constitute a single gene tree, which may or may not accurately depict true species level
relationships. To be reliable, estimates of phylogeny must be based on multiple independent markers. In
the few cases where independent nuclear gene markers have been used to estimate the relationships
among elasmobranchs, taxon-sampling has been sparse and the resulting trees have been highly
discordant. We present, for the first time, a phylogeny based on 8 protein coding loci (7 nuclear, 1
mitochondrial) among 150 of the 190 described genera of elasmobranchs, representing 56 of 57 extant
families. We identify the phylogenetic signal that is common to all 8 markers and discuss the differences
in signal among genes.



Strickland, Jason (University of Central Florida); Territo, Gregory; Carter, Sharon (University of Central
Florida, Canada); Kraus, Fred (Bishop Museum, Canada); Parkinson, Christopher (University of Central
Florida, Canada)

New Guinea and the surrounding islands have a geological history that has generated a diverse
assemblage of species, many of which are endemic. Much of this diversity, however, has not yet been
described or assessed evolutionarily. One group of poorly understood New Guinean reptiles is the elapid
snake genus Toxicocalamus . There are 11 documented species described based on morphological
characters, three of which are only represented by a single specimen. These snakes are small, secretive
burrowers that apparently feed only on earthworms and are not commonly collected. Although previous
research has placed them in the subfamily Hydrophiinae within the Elapidae, the exact placement of the
genus has not been well supported. It is also unknown if the currently described species represent a
monophyletic lineage: species currently placed therein had formerly been assigned to three different
genera. The most recent phylogeny of Hydrophiinae included two Toxicocalamus species and indicated
that the genus is polyphyletic. Our objective was to determine the phylogenetic position of
Toxicocalamus within Elapidae and to evaluate species relationships within the genus using genetic
data. We generated full mitochondrial cytochrome –b sequences (~1100 base pairs) for 26 samples
representing 10 species within this genus. To determine the evolutionary relationships of Toxicocalamus
within Elapidae, we included sequences from GenBank for numerous members of the Hydrophiinae. We



                                                                                                       696
estimated relationships using Bayesian and maximum likelihood methodologies. Aspidomorphus is a
closely related and similarly distributed taxon to Toxicocalamus that exhibits high levels of genetic
divergence among species. We found that Toxicocalamus also shows high levels of genetic divergence
among species. The prevailing hypothesis for the level of diversity in the Papuan region is that it‘s
complicated biogeographic history has created many barriers that limit gene flow and facilitate speciation.
The phylogenetic tree inferred in this study supports this hypothesis and will help shape further
investigation into the mechanisms of speciation on New Guinea and the surrounding islands.



Stuart, Yoel (Harvard University); Campbell, Todd (University of Tampa, Tampa, FL, United States);
Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States)

A real-time test of a classic hypothesis: rapid, replicated character displacement in Anolis
carolinensis following invasion by a congeneric competitor

The theory of ecological character displacement (ECD) posits that natural selection will favor divergence
in resource use and phenotype when sympatric species compete for limited resources. Today ECD is
broadly considered an important agent of diversification in evolution, yet despite the enthusiasm for the
idea and nearly 50 years of study, the number of solid empirical cases is surprisingly few and limited to
observational data. To our knowledge, there are no experimental tests of the ECD hypothesis in nature
even though it is becoming increasingly recognized that natural selection and evolution can be observed
in the wild. We test the ECD hypothesis using a natural experiment initiated by the recent invasion of the
lizard Anolis sagrei to manmade spoil islands in Mosquito Lagoon, FL. These islands already housed the
native lizard, A. carolinensis, so the colonization by A. sagrei to some but not all of these islands created
a replicated, controlled natural experiment that allowed us to test whether the presence of a congeneric
competitor alters habitat use and promotes evolution in populations of A. carolinensis. We visited the
islands in 2010 and 2011 to measure lizard habitat use and morphology, survey island plant communities,
and collect lizards for a common garden experiment. We found that A. carolinensis has shifted its habitat
use to become more arboreal in the presence of A. sagrei compared to islands where A. carolinensis is
allopatric. Moreover, populations of A. carolinensis in the presence of A. sagrei had larger toepads with
more setae-bearing scales, likely enhancing clinging ability, consistent with predictions for an arboreal
lifestyle. Data from the common garden experiment indicate that the morphological change is evolved
rather than plastic. Last, there are no confounding differences in island physical characteristics or plant
diversity and abundance between treatments. Thus, our data provide strong experimental support for the
rapid evolution of ecological character displacement in nature.



Stubbs, Alexander (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Karin, Benjamin (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,