anding of eggcase morphology (e.g., the Common Skate complex).
Although established in the British Isles, the Great Eggcase Hunt receives submissions from around the world, including across
Europe and the Mediterranean, as well as Australia, South Africa, and the USA. The project continues to grow, with
identification resources in development for different regions and an app to make the submission process even easier.

Keywords: citizen science; eggcases; oviparous; Rajidae; Scyliorhinidae
SI Abstract Ref: 224




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 30
Elitza Germanov
Marine Megafauna Foundation, West Palm Beach, Florida, United States of America 1; Centre for Sustainable
Aquatic Ecosystems, Harry Butler Institute, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia 2;
Environmental and Conservation Sciences, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia 3

A decade of manta ray research and conservation in Indonesia
1.    Elitza S. Germanov
2.    Andrea D. Marshall
3.    Simon J. Pierce
4.    Lars Bejder; Marine Mammal Research Program, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii at
1.    Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii, United States
5.    I. Gede Hendrawan; Faculty of Marine Sciences and Fisheries, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia
6.    Neil Loneragan; Faculty of Fisheries and Marine Science, Bogor Institute of Agriculture, Bogor, West Java, Indonesia

Manta rays have some of the lowest estimated population growth rates for elasmobranchs, making them susceptible to drastic
declines from human threats. A decade ago, Indonesia simultaneously hosted one of the largest fisheries for mantas, along
with a major manta ray tourism industry. The high value of tourism was a strong argument for protection, but knowledge of
habitat use was necessary to create effective policy. Galvanizing tourism operators and the public, we used citizen science to
address knowledge gaps, identify manta ray hotspots, and provide baseline population data. We showed that manta rays
routinely moved beyond established conservation and tourism areas into areas of high fishing activity, warranting nationwide
species protection. That was then legislated in 2014.

Subsequently, we have provided longer-term characterizations of the habitat use, demographics, and remaining human threats
to manta ray aggregations within the Nusa Penida Marine Protected Area (MPA) and the Komodo National Park (NP). Using a
combination of active researcher and citizen science we established a high degree of site affinity to two sites within the Nusa
Penida MPA. One site was crucial for adult cleaning and mating, and the other for feeding juveniles. Habitat use in Komodo NP
follows a similar pattern, with four key sites identified.

Ongoing threats to manta rays in these areas include entanglement in fishing gear, plastic pollution, and growing tourism.
Future research aims to assess population dynamics and trends, and to characterize additional critical habitats in the region.


Keywords: photo-ID; population structure; movement; site use; coral triangle region
SI Abstract Ref: 149




Jennifer Keeping
University of Glasgow

Much ado about stingrays
1.    Jennifer Keeping, University of Glasgow
2.    David Bailey, University of Glasgow
3.    Charlotte Hopkins, University of Hull

This presentation intends to showcase the works completed during my MSc by research projects concerning the stingrays of
southern Mozambique, the research gaps I have identified therein and the preliminary results of my forthcoming PhD projects.
I intend to summarise the findings of the two published manuscripts from my MSc studies; the first detailing the validation of the
computer-aided, photo-identification of the smalleye stingray, Megatrygon microps, which is among the largest and most unique
species of stingrays in the world. The second manuscript describes the trends in the sightings of stingray in southern
Mozambique, using citizen-science collected data to determine seasonality and small-scale habitat movement of stingrays in
the diving region of Tofo, Mozambique.
I am now undergoing PhD research to continue to work on filling the many research gaps that I have identified during the MSc
work. My PhD topics include the use of stable isotope analysis to determine feeding ecology, habitat use and movements of
multiple stingray species in the Inhambane provincial region. These data will compliment the photo-ID and diver observations
already completed, whilst increasing our knowledge surrounding the differing trophic roles of each stingray species, their
importance to the ecosystem and, most notably, reveal more about their movements to the ocean zones that are unavailable
with the satellite and acoustic tags traditionally used in movement telemetry studies.


Keywords: stingray; mozambique; ecology; stable isotope; photo-ID
SI Abstract Ref: 129




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 31
Citizen Science & Environmental Education 2


Georgia Jones
Bournemouth University

UK recreational shark angler practices, perceptions and attitudes; bridging the gap between scientists
and anglers for the benefit of sharks
1.    Jones, G.C.A.
2.    Murphy, S.
3.    Rudd, H.
4.    Somerfield, P.
5.    Thomas, S.F.
6.    Stewart, B.D.

Recreational anglers are important stakeholders in global fisheries and have capacity to provide valuable data for scientific
research and conservation management of threatened species. Recreational angling for sharks has a long history in the UK,
and is seeing a renewed surge in popularity, but tensions exist between anglers and scientists over mistrust of how data will be
used and issues around some cases of poor shark handling. The result has been a loss of data sharing and a stymied
understanding of UK shark populations, especially for several threatened species that are considered data-poor. Here we
present the results of the first project initiated by a new collaboration ‘Shark Hub UK’, which aims to bring anglers and scientists
together as equals, for sharks. Our questionnaire was completed by 169 anglers from right around the UK and provided novel
insights into the distribution and intensity of recreational angling activities for UK sharks, the handling methods currently
employed and angler attitudes towards shark management and data sharing. The results will guide future shark handling best-
practice guidance for anglers, rebuild trust between anglers and scientists, and highlight avenues for key future research into
UK shark ecology and conservation.

Keywords: recreational angling; best-practice handling; UK sharks; stakeholder engagement
SI Abstract Ref: 80




Katie Hindle
A Rocha Kenya

Biodiversity and conservation of elasmobranchs in Watamu Marine National Park, Kenya
1.    Katie, Hindle: A Rocha Kenya.
2.    Eric, Thuranira; A Rocha Kenya.
3.    Peter, Musila; A Rocha Kenya.
4.    Colin, Jackson; A Rocha Kenya.
5.    Stanley, Baya; A Rocha Kenya.
6.    Queen, Harare; A Rocha Kenya.
7.    Robert, Sluka; A Rocha International.

The no-take MPA in Watamu Kenya houses a diversity of IUCN Red List threatened elasmobranchs and serves as a nursery
area for at least one of these species. The surrounding community is growing in its understanding of the intrinsic and natural
capital value of these species through creative educational opportunities both in schools and among artisanal fishers.

Ten elasmobranch species were observed using four methods (BRUVs, Timed Swims, Beach walks, and Diving surveys):
Taeniura lymma, Glaucostegus halavi, Carcharhinus melanopterus, Neotrygon caeruleopunctata, Himantura gerrardi,
Himantura uarnak, Triaenodon obesus, Torpedo sinuspersici, Aetobatus narinari, and Rhincodon typus. The most abundant
species were Carcharhinus melanopterus, Taeniura lymma, and Neotrygon caeruleopunctata. Elasmobranchs were observed
most often over sand habitat (56%) followed by seagrass (33%), and coral (11%).

Larger Blacktip reef sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus), majority females were seen August – November. Most small pups
appeared along the shallow sandy areas along the length of WMNP’s beach from October onwards with a decline of larger
sharks around this time. Footage of a shark that appears to show afterbirth with a larger male following was recorded in early
November possibly indicating WMNP as an important pupping ground.

Environmental education created awareness among community members. Programs were conducted in 8 schools reaching
320 students and 10 community groups reaching 237 individuals. An artisanal fishing competition was held for the first time
which involved the use of hooks of a specific size to emphasize the importance of sustainable fishing methods and
conservation of elasmobranchs.


Keywords: MPA; nursery; guitarfish; shark; ray
SI Abstract Ref: 72




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 32
Jennifer Olbers
WILDTRUST

A cross-disciplinary approach to the protection of South Africa’s threatened sharks and rays
1.    Jennifer, Olbers; WILDTRUST
2.    Nikki, Chapman; WILDTRUST
3.    Sandile, Ntuli; WILDTRUST
4.    Summer, Newton; WILDTRUST
5.    Jean, Harris; WILDTRUST
6.    Lauren, van Nijkerk; WILDTRUST
7.    Geremy Cliff; Research Associate of University of KwaZulu-Natal

South Africa is a global hotspot for chondrichthyan diversity while providing important habitats for many threatened species.
Despite a rich history of shark research and management in South Africa, there are knowledge gaps, inadequate statutory
interventions ensuring adequate protection, and a lack of capacity to effectively enforce current legal provisions. Furthermore,
public perceptions about sharks are in general, negative, and based on incorrect information. To improve the protection of
threatened (Vulnerable, Endangered, and Critically Endangered) species, prioritizing South African endemics, the WILDTRUST
through their marine programme, WILDOCEANS, together with the Shark Conservation Fund and many other partners,
implemented a 3-year Shark and Ray Protection Project. A campaign called Shark Attack was launched in March 2020,
highlighting the plight of South Africa’s chondrichthyans and actively attempting to shift negative perceptions and inspire
positive action through its website, social media platforms, and traditional media. The following content are available for
download online: database and annotated checklist comprising all known chondrichthyan species found in South African
waters, detailed status reports on 90 threatened and/or endemic species, a field guide of threatened and endemic species for
law enforcement officers, online species ID workshops, draft recommendations for improved statutory modifications to SA
legislation, shark and ray systematic conservation plan report, with associated R-scripts, highlighting essential habitats for
shark and ray MPA’s or shark sanctuaries, trade toolkit for law enforcement in numerous ports of entry and various information
pack and policy brief for decision-makers. The presentation aims to highlight the successes of this collaborative project.

Keywords: conservation; southern africa; threatened species; endemic; Chondrichthyes
SI Abstract Ref: 48




Evan Prasky
Northeastern University

Quantifying angler perceptions about shark depredation through stakeholder engagement
1.    Evan, Prasky; Northeastern University
2.    Marcus, Drymon; Mississippi State University
3.    Amanda, Jefferson ; Mississippi–Alabama Sea Grant
4.    Mandy, Karnauskas; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
5.    Savannah, Swinea; Northeastern University
6.    Steven, Scyphers; University of South Alabama

The Gulf of Mexico (GoM) is home to 31 federally managed reef fish species that are both commercially and recreationally
important for communities in the region. These fish are federally managed through a series of stock assessments and a
scientific understanding of natural lifecycles. Depredation, defined as the partial or complete removal of a captured species by a
non-target species, is a cause of increased mortality and is not well quantified or understood. Mounting voices from anglers in
the community suggest depredation is not only a prevalent and pervasive issue across the Gulf but also is rapidly increasing.
Because of this, fisheries managers cannot effectively capture true population numbers derived from stock assessments.
Depredation is a complex social-ecological issue that occurs between a multitude of species and is not required to be reported.
Therefore, we have turned to anglers across the GoM to gain insights into their perceptions, interactions, and identification of
the main causes and drivers of depredation to better assist in the classification and characterization to increase the accuracy of
fisheries managers’ stock assessments. To do this, we distributed a Gulf-wide survey (n = 1044) that focused on building
cognitive maps to highlight the perceptions anglers have on depredation. We also asked questions that quantified key factors
that have influenced depredation, such as seasonal variation and fishing habits, to better understand the human-wildlife conflict
that depredation is causing. Using the information gathered, we can begin to more accurately assess how depredation impacts
anglers and stock assessments.

Keywords: shark depredation; human-wildlife conflict; cognitive maps; community perceptions; stakeholder attitudes
SI Abstract Ref: 33




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 33
Sensory Biology, Feeding Habits & Metabolism 1


Robert Priester
Okeanos – University of the Azores

Trophic ecology and coastal habitat use of two sympatric shark species in the Azores archipelago (mid-
Atlantic) assessed with CNS stable isotope analysis
1.    C. Robert, Priester; Okeanos – University of the Azores.
2.    Jan, Dierking; GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel.
3.    David, Abecasis; CCMAR – Centre of Marine Sciences, University of Algarve
4.    Pedro, Afonso; IMAR/Okeanos – University of the Azores

The anthropogenic exploitation of marine resources has caused drastic declines of large predatory fishes. Amongst these,
sharks are of major conservation concern due to their high vulnerability to overfishing and role as top predators. The Azores
Islands, Mid Atlantic, are thought to serve as essential fish habitat (EFH - waters necessary to fish for spawning, breeding,
feeding or growth to maturity) for tope (Galeorhinus galeus) and smooth hammerhead (Sphyrna zygaena) sharks, but data to
better assess this role are scarce. To address existing knowledge gaps, here we provide the first comparative assessment of
the trophic ecology, ontogenetic shifts with increasing shark size and niche partitioning of G. galeus and S. zygeana around the
Azores based on simultaneous δ13C, δ15N and δ34S (CNS) stable isotope analysis. Overall, shark isotopic niches, obtained
using a 3D-Bayesian ellipse approach, indicated a strong role of mixed coastal-benthic resources, but with clear differences
between life stages consistent with intra- and interspecific niche partitioning. Whereas tope shark showed a significant
ontogenetic shift to higher trophic levels within the coastal-benthic prey niche, smooth hammerhead sharks exhibited significant
decreases in δ34S, consistent with an increasing reliance on coastal-benthic prey with growing size. The co-occurrence of
juveniles of two shark species of high conservation concern, and the role of coastal-benthic prey in their diet, highlight the
importance of healthy coastal habitats for the conservation of these emblematic predators in the wider Atlantic, and of the
important role of Azores coastal areas as EFH.

Keywords: Simultaneous carbon nitrogen and sulfur stable isotope analysis; 3D niche hypervolume; niche partitioning;
communal shark nursery; ontogenetic shift
SI Abstract Ref: 168




Sabrina Riverón
Marine Predator Research Group, School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University

Morphology influences niche dynamics in two large sympatric sharks from Uruguayan waters
1.    Sabrina, Riverón; Marine Predator Research Group, School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University.
2.    Vincent, Raoult; School of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle; Marine Ecology Group, School of
      Natural Sciences, Macquarie University.
3.    David J., Slip; Taronga Institute of Science and Learning, Taronga Conservation Society Australia.
4.    Federico, Mas; National Directorate of Aquatic Resources (DINARA).
5.    Martín, Laporta; National Directorate of Aquatic Resources (DINARA), Atlantic Fisheries Management Unit; Campus
      DoMar, International Campus of Excellence, University of Santiago de Compostela.
6.    Inés, Pereyra; National Directorate of Aquatic Resources (DINARA), Atlantic Fisheries Management Unit.
7.    Santiago, Silveira; National Directorate of Aquatic Resources (DINARA), Atlantic Fisheries Management Unit.
8.    Robert G., Harcourt; Marine Predator Research Group, School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University.

Prey availability in an environment does not ensure that prey will be consumed by a predator, as they must also be detected,
captured and handled. Predator morphology imposes limitations on prey selection due to biomechanical constraints, making
some prey functionally inaccessible and thereby shaping predators’ trophic niches. We assessed how two important
components of morphology (tooth shape and body length) influence prey selectivity and trophic niche in two large-bodied
sympatric sharks with contrasting feeding modes. The first species capture prey using spear-shaped, grasping teeth
(Carcharias taurus), while the second has multi-cuspid cutting teeth used to serrate larger prey (Notorynchus cepedianus).
Stomach content analysis and isotopic values of δ13C, δ34S and δ15N from muscle and liver were used to characterize
trophic niche and prey selection. As gape-limited C. taurus grew, their consumption of teleosts decreased inversely to
chondrichthyans. By contrast, non-gape limited N. cepedianus consumed teleosts and chondrichthyans in similar proportions,
along with marine mammals, but with no clear relationship to body size. As body length increased, both species consumed prey
from higher trophic levels (higher δ15N), but N. cepedianus accessed prey at relatively higher trophic levels. δ13C and δ34S
remained substantially unchanged with body length since gape and dentition are less limiting for these tracers. Morphological
characters play an essential role in predator prey selection and may be the primary mechanism facilitating resource partitioning
in marine predators. Their inclusion in ecological studies will help understand prey choice and how it shapes trophodynamics in
marine ecosystems.

Keywords: marine predator; trophic ecology; stable isotopes; stomach contents; Southwestern Atlantic
SI Abstract Ref: 270




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                         Page 34
Erin Spencer
Florida International University

Using biologgers to estimate energy expenditure and consumption rates of great hammerhead sharks
(Sphyrna mokarran)
1.    Erin Spencer, Florida International University
2.    Lisa Hoopes, Georgia Aquarium
3.    Gil Iosilevskii, Technion
4.    Yannis Papastamatiou, Florida International University

Top predators play an important role in ecosystem food webs, and quantifying predators’ energetic needs is key to
understanding their rate of consumption on lower tropic levels. Metabolic costs are the largest components of an organism’s
energy budget, and measuring an organism’s metabolic rate in the field provides an estimate of how much an organism must
consume. We used biologgers to record depth, temperature, speed, tri-axial acceleration and tri-axial magnetism of great
hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna mokarran) tagged off of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of Florida. We then used previously-
established hydrodynamic models of great hammerheads derived from wind tunnel experiments to convert measures of swim
speed from sampled sharks into energy consumption rates. Preliminary analysis of four sharks indicate sampled individuals
would need to consume an average of approximately 1.27 lbs of food per day to account for metabolic costs, varying with
speed and size of the animal. These results further our understanding of the ecological role of great hammerheads, a critically
endangered predator, by allowing us to calculate how much prey they may be removing from local ecosystems.

Keywords: biologging; energetics; great hammerhead sharks; biologgers
SI Abstract Ref: 288




Brianna Cahill
Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, Florida Atlantic University

Breaking bags and crunching clams: Assessing whitespotted eagle ray interactions with shellfish
aquaculture gear
1. Brianna, Cahill; Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, Florida Atlantic University.
2. Kayla, McCulloch; Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami.
3. Breanna, DeGroot; Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, Florida Atlantic University.
4. Kim, Bassos-Hull; Mote Marine Laboratory.
5, Matthew, Ajemian; Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, Florida Atlantic University.

Shallow coastal waters are commonly used in shellfish aquaculture for “grow-out” of bivalves like the Northern Quahog
(Mercenaria mercenaria). These grow-out locations have substantially higher clam densities than the surrounding environment
and potentially attract molluscivores. Inspired by clammer reports of predator-inflicted damage to grow-out gear, we assessed
the capacity of a highly mobile predator (whitespotted eagle ray Aetobatus narinari) to detect and interact with clams housed
within a suite of industry standard antipredator materials. Experiments were conducted in mesocosms where rays were
exposed to unprotected clams (control), clams inside polyester mesh clam bags (dipped in a latex net coating and non-dipped),
and under high density polyethylene (HDPE) or chicken wire cover netting. Gear interactions were quantified from video
footage throughout the course of the experiment and clam mortality was assessed after its completion. Rays interacted with
antipredator gear significantly more than control plots, with particularly long durations noted for clam bags covered with HDPE
netting. While rays were capable of consuming clams through bags, antipredator treatments reduced clam mortality by 4-10x
compared to control plots. Double-layered (i.e., bags with cover netting) treatments exhibited the lowest clam mortality
(0.6±0.1%), highlighting the utility of this type of protection in shellfish aquaculture.


Keywords: Batoid; shellfisheries; behavioral ecology
SI Abstract Ref: 294




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 35
Ulrich Martin
UCLouvain, marine biology laboratory

A comparison of deep-sea sharks trophic ecology over large spatial scales.
1.    Ulrich, Martin; Université Catholique de Louvain
2.    Gilles, Lepoint; Université de Liège
3.    Jérôme, Mallefet; Université Catholique de Louvain

An important diversity of sharks lives in the depths of the oceans around the world. The trophic ecology of these species is still
poorly known due to the difficulties to access this remote environment and observing individuals directly. Indirect observations
have proven useful in addressing this issues through the use of stomach contents analyses mainly. This method provides
essential information but is subjected to a series of biases: only recent prey can be observed, different tissues have different
digestion rates and a lot of stomachs might be empty. Other approaches such as stable isotopes (SIA) or fatty acid profiling
(FAP) are more and more recognized to achieve more comprehensive ecological data.

We used SIA to explore the trophic ecology of different deep-sea shark communities across the world. A total of 21 species
were considered, coming from five locations separated by large distances: Chatham Rise plateau in New Zealand, Taiwan,
Kerguelen Islands, Gascogne strait and Mediterranean Sea. δ13C, δ15N, and δ34S isotope ratios were measured on muscle
and liver samples after lipid, TMAO and urea extraction. Isotopic niches were then calculated using Bayesian statistical
methods. The ecological inferences were compared between the different locations, considering parameters such as spatial
scale, latitude, longitude or taxonomic classification to try and explain the similitude and differences observed. This work was
supported by a travel research grant from FNRS Belgium.

Keywords: deep-sea sharks; trophic ecology; stable isotope
SI Abstract Ref: 323




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 36
Citizen Science & Environmental Education 3


Corina Silva
California State University Long Beach- Shark Lab

Shark Lab Education and Outreach
Corina, Silva; CSULB Shark Lab

The Shark Lab has long been a keystone in elasmobranch research in the local Long Beach community and global shark
knowledge. With so much innovation in new technology and research techniques to study behavior and ecology of marine
animals, the lab has a wealth of scientific findings to make readily available and applicable to the public and students of all
ages. Our mobile outreach program, called Shark Shacks, travels across southern California beaches and ocean piers to reach
thousands of beachgoers and lifeguards. Additionally, the Shark Lab has begun to implement new educational programs
specific to K-12 classrooms focusing on getting students interested in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM).
Beginning with virtual and transitioning to in-person programming, curricula encompass content covering shark biology,
technology, and careers in these STEM fields. Our outreach and education efforts are focused on informing beach goers
across all ages about shark behavior and how to stay safe while enjoying the ocean. For K-12 students, the goal of the lab is to
increase access to dynamic and interesting fields across disciplines and invoke excitement about fields they may have never
seen themselves in. All our programming is free of charge and open to diverse audiences across southern California and
beyond.

Keywords: education; outreach; stem; k-12 ; school
SI Abstract Ref: 11




Ian Campbell
PADI AWARE Foundation

The Global Shark Census - can citizen science add value to research?
      1.    Ian Campbell; PADI AWARE Foundation
      2.    Andrew Chin; James Cook University

One of the fastest growing fields in marine conservation is the development and expansion of citizen science projects. Shark
and ray conservation is a particularly appealing field for citizen science projects, yet the majority of the existing programmes are
uncoordinated and vary greatly in effort and level of participant expertise. The recent review of emergent research and priorities
for shark and ray conservation (Jorgensen et al. 2022) identified an urgent need to increase coordination, leadership and
collaboration between scientists, governments and community groups.

PADI (The Professional Association of Diving Instructors) and The PADI AWARE Foundation have a successful track record of
developing and implementing successful large-scale citizen science initiatives. Our existing Dive Against Debris has been
successful in coordinating the global efforts of millions of divers conducting marine debris surveys, leading to data contributing
towards ground-breaking research.

In 2023, the PADI AWARE Foundation will seek to replicate the success of Dive Against Debris and launch the Global Shark
Census. This initiative aims to coordinate the efforts of PADI’s global network of 6,600 dive centres, 128,000 PADI
Professionals and 15 million registered and active PADI divers to collect shark and ray datasets that will actively contribute
towards the development of management measures, augment academic research and bring scale to conservation advocacy.
This presentation will outline the opportunities to harness data collection on an unprecedented scale.

Keywords: citizen science; conservation; divers; data collection
SI Abstract Ref: 139




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 37
Re'em Neri
Sharks in Israel

Mining social media for Elasmobranch fishery data in conflict zones: The Gaza strip as a case study
1.    Re'em, Neri; Sharks in Israel
2.    Adi, Barash; Sharks in Israel
3.    Uri, Neri ; Tel Aviv University

A huge gap in environmental information exists in conflict regions where environmental access to scientists ranges from unsafe
to impossible. Previously unknown knowledge of Elasmobranchii presence, composition, and distribution can provide valuable
information regarding the exploitation of elasmobranch species and for creating comprehensive conservation strategies.
However, the diversity, ecology, behavior, and many other characteristics of these species in conflict zones remain virtually
unknown, which is a major cause for concern.
Traditional species surveys rely on in-situ observations and municipality regulations forcing fisheries to self-report their catch.
Conflict areas present a unique challenge, lacking formal regulation or scientific access. Here, we report the first use of social
media monitoring (“iEcology”) of the extent of the Elasmobranch fishery in the Gaza strip, a conflict region previously lacking
any information. Our database consists of 3 years of daily reported catch from 8 markets in the Gaza strip. We collected 584
data points belonging to 2348 individuals of 14 species. The analysis of the data suggests temporal, spatial, and seasonal
trends in elasmobranch catch distribution are affected by changes in the access to maritime areas due to local conflict
escalations and de-escalations.
We demonstrate this approach as a relatively accurate and inexpensive data analysis procedure, allowing the quantification
and normalization of multiple unrelated observations of caught and targeted fish into a uniformed geo-spatial-temporal system-
making it a prime candidate for future endeavors in other conflict zones in coastal regions.

Keywords: Elasmobranch fishery; iEcology; social media; conflict zones
SI Abstract Ref: 173




Lindsay Laughner
Field School Foundation

Research, educate, and explore the world with sharks and field school
1.    Dr. Julia Wester
2.    Dr Catherine Macdonald
3.    Lindsay Laughner

Studies have shown that STEM education leads to better public perceptions and understanding of science and the broader
impact of its role in society. As charismatic species, sharks and rays can be used as ambassador species for increasing the
reach of both STEM and ocean education. This talk will present the programs, experiences, and lessons to date from Field
School and the Field School Foundation, a set of hybrid research-education programs operating in Miami-Dade, Florida and
centered on that community’s connections to Biscayne Bay. Biscayne Bay is a large, fragile marine estuary with considerable
marine biodiversity, including of several endangered elasmobranch species. To communicate the role that sharks have in the
ocean and educate families on the impact they are having on them, accessible resources are needed. Through a combination
of student and citizen science participation and ready-to-deploy classroom lesson plans that integrate the research program
and local ecosystems, these programs help to teach data and ocean literacy, build communication skills, and develop locally-
relevant STEM curriculum that differentiates research for general audiences at multiple levels. Field School creates a safe and
inclusive environment for students to learn and develop hands-on skills, as students apply what they are learning and seeing
the impact they have first hand. Our education programs and curriculum are free, and available for students of all ages , to
connect people locally and globally to sharks in Biscayne Bay, Florida, as we research, educate, and explore, the world of
sharks together.

Keywords: research; education; programs; curriculum
SI Abstract Ref: 211




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 38
Genetics 1


Jessica Winn
Stellenbosch University

Global phylogeography and population genomics of the commercially exploited smoothhound shark
1.    Jessica Winn: Stellenbosch University
2.    Aletta Bester-Van der Merwe: Stellenbosch University
3.    Simo Maduna: The Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy Research

Accelerated global warming and over-exploitation of marine species threaten to eradicate the unique genetic archives of
modern Chondrichthyans (sharks, rays, and chimeras), an evolutionarily robust lineage with a 400-million-year genealogy.
Understanding the impact of rapidly changing global conditions on elasmobranchs (sharks and rays) and devising conservation
responses relies on the identification of unique genetic populations adapted to specific environmental niches. This research
focuses on delineating the global phylogeography of the common smoothhound shark, Mustelus mustelus, using whole
mitogenome data from 9 sampling populations collected across the species’ distribution range. The same samples have been
used to generate reduced-representation sequencing (RRS) (RADSeq) data in order to reveal associations between single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) alleles and environmental variables hypothesized to drive selection while controlling for the
confounding effects of neutral genetic structure. It is predicted that species inhabiting the rapidly warming, yet diverse,
biogeographic regions of South Africa and the Mediterranean Sea are likely locally adapted to their environment which can lead
to differences in genetic variation among populations even in the face of high gene flow. The eventual goal is to better
characterize the genomic mechanisms of environmental adaptation and provide a system for predicting responses to new
selective challenges in this species and exploited houndsharks. The mitogenomes of four such species have been sequenced
and submitted for publication, providing an opportunity to increase the resolution of phylogenomic studies and conduct more
extensive population genomics investigations to better inform management strategies.

Keywords: phylogenomics; population genomics; Triakidae; phylogeography; local adaptation
SI Abstract Ref: 1




Fenella Wood
University of Aberdeen

Genomic investigation and kinship provide insights into a highly mobile shark
1.    Fenella, Wood; University of Aberdeen.
2.    Tanja, Schwanck; University of Aberdeen
3.    James, Thorburn; University of St. Andrews
4.    Andrew, Meharg; Queens University Belfast
5.    Leslie, Noble; Nord University
6.    Catherine, Jones; University of Aberdeen

Spurdog (Squalus acanthias) are a wide-ranging, highly mobile, small shark found in temperate seas across the globe. Once a
commercially important species, they have experienced severe declines and are now listed as Endangered in the Northeast
Atlantic. Despite a zero total allowable catch, they can be caught as bycatch, which as an aggregating species, can comprise of
up to <10 tonnes in a single catch. This may impact population size, with subsequent effects on genetic diversity.

Previous research using microsatellite markers suggested that aggregations may contain closely related individuals. As the loss
of kin groups can rapidly erode selectable genetic diversity, understanding the genetic composition of spurdog across the
British Isles is crucial to assess the potential impact of their removal by fishing on population sustainability. Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism (SNP) markers are being used to understand the genetic diversity and population structuring of spurdog across
the British Isles. Kinship will also be investigated to reveal whether relations are found within sampled aggregations. This may
subsequently provide insight into their aggregating behaviour, in terms of origin and persistence as a group, as well as the
genetic diversity of the spurdog that they represent.

Keywords: kinship; genomics; genetic diversity; aggregating species
SI Abstract Ref: 97




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 39
Mahmood Shivji
Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center, Nova Southeastern University

Global population genomics assessment of the critically endangered great hammerhead shark
1.    Mahmood Shivji; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center, Nova Southeastern University.
2.    Cassandra Ruck; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center, Nova Southeastern University.
3.    Nicholas Marra; Governors State University.
4.    Michael Stanhope; Cornell University.
5.    Andrea Bernard; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center, Nova Southeastern University.

The great hammerhead (Sphyrna mokarran) is an iconic, large-bodied shark species distributed worldwide in tropical to warm
temperate seas, in habitats ranging from coastal to semi-oceanic waters. Great hammerhead shark fins have high value in the
international fin trade. Overexploitation coupled with high bycatch mortality has caused steep declines in much of its
distribution, resulting in an IUCN Red List assessment of great hammerheads as “Critically Endangered” globally. Since little
knowledge existed about the population genetic dynamics of this species to inform conservation management, we used a high-
resolution, bi-organelle, genomics approach to assess the population structure and genetic diversity of this species across large
parts of its global distribution. Analyses with Single Nucleotide Polymorphism markers (n=162; 1816 SNPs) revealed three
highly distinct global populations, comprising great hammerheads from the Western Atlantic, Red Sea/Persian Gulf and
east/west Australian coasts, with no population structure observed within these large regions. Analyses using 176 complete
mitochondrial genome sequences (mitogenomes), in contrast, revealed matrilineal genetic distinctiveness on smaller spatial
scales, including between the western North Atlantic and Caribbean, and within the western Indian Ocean, consistent with
female philopatry. There was no evidence for population differentiation with either SNP or mitogenome markers between
western and northeastern Australia sampled great hammerheads. Notably, global mitogenome-based phylogeographic
analyses revealed that Australian great hammerheads are highly evolutionarily divergent from western Indian and western
Atlantic conspecifics.

Keywords: great hammerhead; population genomics; population structure
SI Abstract Ref: 24




Ana Veríssimo
CIBIO-InBIO; Associação BioPolis

Screening the immune gene diversity of Cartilaginous fish – relevance to management and evolution
1.    Ana, Veríssimo;
2.    Martin, Flajnik;
3.    Arnaud, Gaigher;
4.    Tereza, Almeida;
5.    Yuko, Ohta;
6.    Antonio, Muñoz;
7.    Fabiana, Neves;
8.    Alessia, Rota;
9.    Beatriz, Dias;
10.   Filipe, Castro;
11.   André, Machado;
12.   Pedro, Esteves;
13.   Bárbara, Serra-Pereira;
14.   Teresa, Moura.

This talk showcases the relevance of studying immune genes in Cartilaginous fish, providing specific examples of their
relevance to fisheries management and conservation, and to understand the evolution of this ancient group. Genetic diversity at
immune genes is driven by pathogen-induced selection, leading to locally adapted populations and reduced migrant fitness.
Thus, immune genes may be better at detecting biologically relevant population units compared to neutral markers (e.g. nuclear
microsatellites), improving stock delimitation. Also, preserving immune gene diversity across populations is key to ensure their
adaptive potential against future pathogens and environmental changes. These features make immune genes prime candidate
markers in improving stock identification and the sustainable long-term management of vulnerable marine species. On the
other hand, Chondrichthyans are the oldest living jawed vertebrates with the basic features of adaptive immunity; thus, they are
a key group in the evolution of vertebrate adaptive immunity and are essential to identify its ancestral and derived features.
Also, given the group´s long evolutionary history and remarkable ecological diversity, different lineages experienced different
environmental stressors and pathogenic agents, perhaps resulting in different immune response mechanisms and genetic
makeup. Here, we show results contrasting genetic diversity patterns at neutral vs. immune genes for commercially exploited
shark species, and their implication to population structure reconstruction. We also uncover the high diversity of immune gene
(MHC) lineages in Chondrichthyans compared to previous assumptions, and unravel how Chondrichthyan genomics contribute
to reconstructing the primordial immune complex at the dawn of jawed vertebrates.

Keywords: Immunogenetics; non-neutral markers; fisheries; ecological diversity; adaptive evolution
SI Abstract Ref: 259




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 40
Ana Filipa Sobral
1Okeanos R&D Centre, Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal

Filling the gap: conservation genetics of endangered migratory elasmobranchs - from oceanic islands to
ocean basins
1.    Ana, Sobral; Okeanos R&D Centre, Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores, Horta,
      Portugal.
2.    Emily, Humble; Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and the Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, EH25 9RG,
      UK.
3.    Pedro, Afonso; Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre (MARE), Department of Oceanography and Fisheries,
      University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal
4.    Rob, Ogden; Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and the Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, EH25 9RG, UK

The survival of chondrichthyans is a major marine conservation concern, with over one-third of species currently at risk of
extinction due to their exceptional vulnerability and low resilience to high levels of exploitation. However, our extremely limited
knowledge of their basic ecology hampers the implementation of proper management and conservation actions. There is also a
knowledge gap on the genetic diversity and population structure of these species at different spatial scales. This is especially
true for migratory species that, at different stages of their life, depend on the restricted coastal habitats of oceanic islands.
Understanding the degree of genetic connectivity allows to define population boundaries and infer dispersal patterns, while
describing genetic diversity will allow to inform appropriate measures to preserve it. To fill this knowledge gap, we used a
genetic multi-marker approach focused on two key migratory and endangered species of contrasting life histories and behavior:
tope shark (Galeorhinus galeus) and sicklefin devil ray (Mobula tarapacana). We evaluated population structure and assessed
connectivity at different spatial scales – from ocean basins to the island groups within the Azorean archipelago - through the
analysis of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) markers and Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The results of this project will
provide science-based knowledge to support suitable management and conservation actions, regionally and globally.

Keywords: conservation; genetics; connectivity; endangered; elasmobranchs
SI Abstract Ref: 357




Cindy Gonzalez
Florida International University

The hidden hammerhead: Sphyrna alleni sp. nov., a new species of bonnethead shark
(Carcharhiniformes, Sphyrnidae) from the Caribbean and the Southwest Atlantic

1.    Cindy Gonzalez; Predator Ecology and Conservation Lab, Biological Sciences Department, Florida International
      University, Miami, Florida, U.S.A.
2.    Bautisse Postaire; Tropical Marine Ecology Lab, University of la Réunion, Saint- Denis, Réunion Gavin Naylor; Florida
      Program for Shark Research, Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, U.S.A
3.    Rob Robins; Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, U.S.A
4.    William Driggers; NOAA Fisheries, Southeast Fisheries Science Center, Missisipi, U.S.A
5.    Susana Caballero; Laboratorio de Ecología Molecular de Vertebrados Acuáticos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas,
      Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
6.    Kevin A. Feldheim; Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution, Field Museum of Natural History,
      Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.
7.    Alejandro Quiroga; Laboratorio de Ecología Molecular de Vertebrados Acuáticos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas,
      Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
8.    Demian Chapman; Center for Shark Research, Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, Florida, U.S.A

Hammerheads (Carcharhiniformes, Sphyrnidae) are a recent radiation of 10 described shark species, characterized by their
laterally expanded head (“cephalofoil”). All hammerhead species are listed in threatened categories by the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) due to overexploitation. Genetic analyses of one species, the bonnethead shark (S.
tiburo) reveal that it is possibly a species complex, with one species occurring in the Western Atlantic from the U.S.A to Mexico
and another occurring from Belize to Brazil. Morphometric, meristic, and genetic variation was used to examine differences
between these cryptic species and describe them. Sixty-one morphometric measurements and three meristic characters
(vertebral count, lower and upper rows of functional teeth) were taken from 23 bonnetheads, 12 from Placencia, Belize and 11
from Florida, U.S. For the morphometric data an allometric formula was used to standardize any effect caused by differences in
size of the individuals. These data were analyzed with univariate and multivariate statistics. There were no significant
differences in the morphology of the two species, however, there were non-overlapping vertebral counts between Florida and
Belize specimens. Variation at two mitochondrial markers (cytochrome oxidase I and control region) and 12 nuclear
microsatellite loci are also partitioned between these two species. The genetic and meristic characters clearly differentiate
these species and enable formal descriptions of Sphyrna tiburo from the U.S.A. to Mexico, and S. alleni from Belize to Brazil.
The latter is already likely threatened with extinction throughout its range.

Keywords: Bonnethead shark; mtDNA; nuclear DNA; phylogeography; Sphyrna alleni sp. nov
SI Abstract Ref: 248




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 41
Citizen Science & Environmental Education 4



María del Pilar Blanco Parra
Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología-Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Quintana Roo

Citizen science as a tool to get baseline ecological and biological data on sharks and rays in a data-poor
region
1.    María-del-Pilar Blanco-Parra, Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Quintana
      Roo, Fundación Internacional para la Naturaleza y la Sustentabilidad
2.    Angelli Argaez Gasca, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Quintana Roo
3.    Camila Alejandra Reyes Rincón, Universidad del Bosque
4.    Nicte Ha Gutiérrez Martínez, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Quintana Roo
5.    Carlos Alberto Niño-Torres, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Quintana Roo, Fundación Internacional para la
      Naturaleza y la Sustentabilidad

The Mexican Caribbean is in one of the regions with the greatest diversity of elasmobranchs in the world. However, the
population status of most of the shark and ray species in this region is unknown. We used a citizen science program based on
divers to collect data about the diversity, abundance, and distribution of elasmobranchs in this region. We visited dive centers in
six locations and performed structured interviews with divemasters, instructors, and owners of the diving centers. In total, 79
divers were interviewed, of which 69% had more than five years’ experience diving in the Mexican Caribbean. Divers could
identify 24 elasmobranch species for this region. Most of the divers (82%) reported a decrease in sightings of sharks and rays.
Rays were the most frequently sighted species by divers (89%), and the spotted eagle ray (A. narinari) was the most common
elasmobranch species reported in the region. Citizen science was a useful approach gathering for baseline information about
sharks and rays in the Mexican Caribbean, increasing our knowledge of the abundance and distribution of some species in this
region. Citizen science affords the opportunity to obtain long-term data that can be useful for management and conservation.


Keywords: sharks; rays; monitoring; human dimension; scuba diving
SI Abstract Ref: 230




Nadia T. Rubio-Cisneros
1 Laboratorio de Biología de la Conservación y Desarrollo Sustentable de la Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas,
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico 2 Mar Sustentable Ciencia y
Conservación, A.C. Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico. 3 Center for Marine Biodiversity and Conservation, Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, United States

Generating baseline socioecological data on the past and current Human Perceptions of sharks'
presence on Cozumel Island: a hotspot for global tourism
1.  Nadia T. Rubio-Cisneros, Laboratorio de Biología de la Conservación y Desarrollo Sustentable de la Facultad de Ciencias
    Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; Mar Sustentable Ciencia y
    Conservación, A.C. Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
2. Center for Marine Biodiversity and Conservation, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego,
    United States;
3. Teresa Martín, Mar Sustentable Ciencia y Conservación, A.C. Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; Corales Vivos Cozumel.
4. Izaizel L. Cruz-Gómez, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Facultad de Ciencias.
5. Francisco Rodríguez-Castillo, Universidad Autónoma de Quintana Roo, Campus Cozumel, Laboratorio de Observación e
    Investigación Espacial.
6. Oscar Frausto-Martínez, Universidad Autónoma de Quintana Roo, Campus Cozumel, Laboratorio de Observación e
    Investigación Espacial.
7. Blanca A. Quiroga-García, Comisión Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas, Parque Nacional Arrecifes de Cozumel
8. Juan Carlos Pérez Jiménez, Departamento de Ciencias de la Sustentabilidad, El Colegio de la Frontera Sur, Lerma,
    Campeche, Mexico
9. Rodrigo A. Núñez-Inzunza, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados. Unidad Mérida.
10. Félix A. Vázquez-Pech, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y Zootecnia.
11. José Ignacio González-Rojas, Laboratorio de Biología de la Conservación y Desarrollo Sustentable de la Facultad de
    Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico


Socioecological data on sharks is scant for many islands of Latin America. Our goal is to develop baseline information on the
diversity and presence of sharks through time. On Cozumel, The Arrecifes de Cozumel National Park and the Isla de Cozumel
Flora and Fauna Protection Area have high biodiversity and interconnectivity between ecosystems as mangroves, seagrasses,
and coral reefs part of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef.
Since 2021 we have collected 90 Local Ecological Knowledge (LEK) fishers' surveys with a geospatial component. Scuba
diving has been a central activity on the island since the 70s. Together with fishers' LEK, we are documenting divers'
perceptions of the environment. In collaboration with diving enterprises, we have integrated a database with 45 records
documenting shark sightings. Combining the above data using geospatial tools, we have over 15 polygons around the island



                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 42
where Nurse Shark (Ginglymostoma cirratum), Great Hammerhead Shark (Sphyrna mokarran), Scalloped Hammerhead Shark
(Sphyrna lewini), Black Tip Shark (Carcharhinus limbatus), Caribbean Reef Shark (Carcharhinus perezi), and Tiger shark
(Galeocerdo cuvier) have been documented. Preliminary underwater observations allowed establishing shark presence and
qualitative descriptions of the aquatic habitats. Sharks' literature and historical pictures are being collected. Narratives
manifested a decrease in shark presence during the last 15 years. Responses attribute this to excess maritime traffic and mass
tourism. Our novel interdisciplinary data proves LEK can provide information on species' existence, behavior, and ecology.
Preserving Cozumel's natural capital, including sharks, is critical given that local people depend on healthy ecosystems for their
local economy and well-being.


Keywords: islands; sharks; traditional knowledge; fishers; divers
SI Abstract Ref: 281




Abigail Campbell
Northeastern University

Assessing fisheries interactions and population demographics of oceanic whitetip sharks (Carcharhinus
longimanus) through citizen science and photo identification
1.    Melanie Hutchinson; NOAA Cooperative Institute for Marine & Atmospheric Research.
2.    Molly Scott; NOAA Cooperative Institute of Marine & Atmospheric Research.
3.    Lacey Scheeler; University of Hawaiʻi. Deron Verbeck; I Am Aquatic.

Oceanic whitetip sharks (Carcharhinus longimanus) were listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act in 2018, and
stock assessments indicate that populations in the western and central Pacific are historically and currently overfished.
However, large data gaps remain in relation to the basic biology, ecology and population structure of this species. Photographic
identification is a common and non-invasive method used to evaluate metrics of elasmobranch population demographics,
abundance, residency and movement, and social behaviors. The main Hawaiian Islands are a known ‘hotspot’ for C.
longimanus where they typically exhibit seasonal residency; a finding that is also supported by local fisher knowledge. This
study describes the results of the Hawaii Community Tagging Program, a citizen science initiative in which fishers, divers and
snorkelers submitted images of C. longimanus interactions around the main Hawaiian Islands beginning in 2008. Over 2000
images of C. longimanus were analyzed, and dorsal fin patterns were used to determine the number of unique and resighted
individuals. To date, this study has identified 313 unique individuals with 15 resights; the sex ratio of females to males is
approximately 2:1 (169 females and 81 males identified) ). We identified 45 females (~26%) with scarring or injuries from
potential mating interactions and 85 individuals (~34%) carried evidence of previous fishing interactions. The information
obtained from this study can help provide baseline information regarding the population demographics, residency and fishery
interactions of C. longimanus around the main Hawaiian islands to help inform conservation and management measures for
this protected species.

Keywords: photo identification; protected species; fishery interactions; Elasmobranch conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 299



Alejandra Mendoza
ecOceanica

Whale shark tourism and conservation through citizen science
1.    Alejandra Mendoza; ecOceanica
2.    Rossana Maguiño-Ñapurí: ecOceanica
3.    Shaleyla Kelez; ecOceanica
4.    Dení Ramirez; Tiburón Ballena Mexico

Whale sharks are globally threatened; in Peru, there is no further regulation for the species than a fishing ban.
Since 2014, we have been working in northern Peru with local communities to create awareness and gather data of whale
shark encounters. In 2018, we start training stakeholders, such as fishermen and tour operators in how to offer responsible
whale shark tourism activities to help them improve their practice and to help us collect data for the project. We implemented
workshops to present the Best Practice Guidelines, and to receive feedback. We used an ethogram to collect whale shark
behavior related to the boat and swimmers during fieldwork, additionally in every encounter we recorded injuries if found.
To date, we have trained 53 boat Capitan and crew, in data collection and we have recommended the best practices for
observation and swimming with the species. During fieldwork, we found that 85% of the sharks react to the swimmers by
changing direction (89%), diving (61%), and/or swimming faster (59%). Moreover, 88% of sharks were encountered with
injuries or signs of being injured recently.
The recommendations from the training workshops were collected, and together with our results, a manual for good practices
for whale shark tourism was prepared for the Peruvian government which is now in its final stage of review.


Keywords: eastern Pacific; ethogram; behavior; management
SI Abstract Ref: 326




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                         Page 43
Paula Carlson
IUCN Shark Specialist Group’s Aquarium Working Group

Engaging Aquarium Scientists in Global Shark Conservation through the IUCN Shark Specialist Group’s
Aquarium Working Group
1.   Michael Farquhar – Two Oceans Aquarium
2.   Paula Carlson – Dallas World Aquarium
3.   Lisa Hoopes – Georgia Aquarium
4.   Nuria Baylina, Oceanario de Lisboa
5.   Max Janse, Royal Burgers’ Zoo
6.   Shawn Larson, Seattle Aquarium
7.   Rui Matsumoto, Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium
8.   Laura Simmons, Sea Life Sydney Aquarium
9.   Kelly Timmins, Atlantis The Palm

Elasmobranchs (sharks and rays) face a range of conservation challenges contributing to extensive population declines.
Consequently, there has been considerable global effort to address these declines and the IUCN’s Shark Specialist Group
(SSG) has been central to many of these efforts by bringing together experts from around the world. For the first time, an
Aquarium Working Group (AWG) has been formed within the SSG to recognize the role which public aquaria play in the
conservation of sharks and rays. The AWG has nine members from around the world, and has identified four priority tasks:
1. Develop a position statement for the SSG on the role of aquariums in elasmobranch conservation.
2. Compile life history information from Critically Endangered elasmobranchs in aquariums to inform conservation action,
     with a focus on sawfishes, rhino rays (wedgefishes and guitarfishes), and south American freshwater stingrays.
3. Develop a SSG position statement on ex-situ elasmobranch release, rescue, and re-introduction.
4. Develop SSG messaging and graphics on elasmobranch conservation for aquarium exhibits, outreach, and education
     programs.
In addition to introducing the AWG, we will present the findings of a global survey focused on the current extent of
elasmobranch release, rescue, and re-introduction within the aquarium community.

Keywords: aquarium; coordination; conservation; communication




                                                                 Sharks International 2022                        Page 44
Thursday 13th October, 2022

Behaviour, Physiology & Discard Survival 1


Maitane Grande
AZTI

Post-release survival of accidentally captured silky shark in tuna purse seiners
1.    Iñigo, Onandia; AZTI
2.    Maitane, Grande; AZTI
3.    José Maria, Galaz; ECHEBASTAR
4.    Jon, Uranga; AZTI
5.    Nerea, Lezama-Ochoa; AZTI/Current Institution: NOAA
6.    Jefferson, Murua; AZTI
7.    Jon, Ruiz; AZTI
8.    Igor, Arregui; AZTI
9.    Hilario, Murua; ISSF
10.   Josu, Santiago; AZTI


Tagging programs are key to evaluate post-release mortality of Endangered, Threatened, and Protected species that are
caught incidentally in fishing operations. This work presents results of a tagging program conducted on purse seiners under
ECHEBASTAR company, aimed at assessing post-release survival of silky sharks caught in association with tuna schools and
released according to the Code of Good Practices. During two fishing trips sixty silky sharks were tagged (28 and 32 silky
sharks in the first and second trip, respectively) with 37 SPATs and 23 MiniPATs, and blood samples were collected in 124
sharks for lactate concentration measurement to be used as an indicator of shark survival. A vitality index based on state and
behavior at release was also assigned to all the sharks caught accidentally. The overall predicted survival of silky shark was
close to 40% based on vitality index derived from tagged sharks. The overall survival rate predicted using lactate concentration
threshold was more variable among trips going from 35% to 60% in the first and second trip, respectively. Shark survivorship
decreased as the fishing operation advanced and vitality index declined. This post-release survival estimates duplicate previous
estimations on purse seiners. The experience gained over time in the application of best practices and fauna release devices
(i.e. the bycatch conveyor belt) installed on-board contributed to reducing shark mortality in the purse seiner fishery.

Keywords: Silky shark; C. falciformis; post-release survival; FADs; purse seiner
SI Abstract Ref: 307




Andrew Chin
James Cook University

Reducing hammerhead bycatch in the Great Barrier Reef: testing alternatives to mesh nets
1.    Andrew Chin, James Cook University
2.    Sushmita Mukherji, James Cook University
3.    Allan Bobbermen, Hinchinbrook Seafoods
4.    John Page, JP Consultants

Mesh net fisheries can result in bycatch of species of conservation interest (SOCI) such as dugongs and hammerhead sharks.
In the Great Barrier Reef, bycatch mortality of both SOCI and of undersized/unwanted fishes has severely affected the fishery's
social license and has exacerbated conflict, especially with recreational fishers. However, trap type gears can help reduce
mortality. Tunnel nets are large mobile fish traps that guide the catch into a tunnel where the catch remains free-swimming until
brailling and sorting. Bycatch is released in very good condition. Larger species including SOCI such as marine turtles, sharks,
and rays are prevented from entering the tunnel by large mesh grids, and remain free swimming in a holding area until release.
Increasing regulatory pressure and public scrutiny of net fisheries in the Great Barrier Reef are driving efforts to find solutions to
improve sustainability and community support for fisheries while maintaining fisher livelihoods. Here we describe the results of
a small-scale feasibility trial using tunnel net gears in the shallow coastal waters of the Great Barrier Reef. Expert tunnel net
fishers worked with local net fishers to trial and test the use of tunnel nets. The gear works, fishers can catch fish and SOCI
species such as hammerheads and batoids were released unharmed. However, the suitability and feasibility of these gears
requires careful consideration and while the gear is technically feasible, its commercial viability remains unknown. The
perspectives and attitudes of commercial fishers and other stakeholders engaged during the trials will also be presented.

Keywords: hammerhead; bycatch; fishing gear; protected species; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 157




Marta D. Palacios



                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 45
CICIMAR, Instituto Politecnico Nacional; Mobula Conservation; Manta Trust; Pelagios Kakunja

Ecology and fisheries vulnerability of the Munk’s devil ray in the Mexican Pacific.
1.    Marta D. Palacios, CICIMAR, Instituto Politecnico
2.    Abel Trejo Ramírez, Mobula Conservation
3.    Donald A. Croll, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Department, University of California Santa Cruz
4.    Felipe Galván Magaña, CICIMAR, Instituto Politecnico
5.    Kelly M. Zilliacus, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Department, University of California Santa Cruz
6.    Joshua D. Stewart, The Manta Trust
7.    John B. O’Sullivan, Monterey Bay Aquarium,
8.    Edgar M. Hoyos Padilla, Pelagios Kakunjá A.C.
9.    James T. Ketchum, Pelagios Kakunjá A.C.
10.   Rogelio González Armas, CICIMAR, Instituto Politecnico


Munk’s pygmy devil ray (Mobula munkiana) are medium size, zooplanktivorous filter feeding elasmobranchs. Native to the
Eastern Tropical Pacific and listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List, their aggregative behavior exacerbates its captured as
targeted catch and as incidental bycatch in both artisanal and large-scale fisheries. By employing multiple approaches (acoustic
telemetry, stable isotopes, traditional tagging, and photometry), we collected data to complete life history gaps such as the
identification of critical habitats, migratory routes, and aggregative behavior patterns at the Mexican Pacific. At the same time,
we assess their rates of post-release mortality from artisanal gillnet fisheries in Mexico using acoustic tags to understand the
population-level effects of survival due to fisheries impacts on this species. To date, results of acoustic tags in M. munkiana
individuals (n=108), traditional tags (n=95), blood samples for isotopes analysis (n=69) and photometry surveys (n=60) have
allow us to describe a nursery area within the Marine Protected Area of Espiritu Santo Archipelago, and a reproductive ground
for the species in La Ventana Bay in Baja California Sur. Pupping and mating periods are linked to spring and summer (April to
June) seasons. Size and sex segregation is present in this species, including a differentiation in their diet as they grow,
switching from euphausiids to mysids as main prey. Migratory patterns repeat across four years connecting at least 2 different
Marine Protected Areas in the southern Gulf of California.

Keywords: mobula; nursery area; mating ground; migratory movements; marine protected area
SI Abstract Ref: 103




Taylor Grosse
Curtin University, Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (Fisheries WA)

An integrated approach for assessing the survival of discarded sandbar sharks, Carcharhinus plumbeus,
captured in longlines
1.    Taylor Grosse; Curtin University, Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (Fisheries WA)
2.    Cynthia Awruch; University of Tasmania, Centro para el Estudio de Ecosistemas Marinos (CESIMAR) - Consejo Nacional
      de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)
3.    Euan Harvey; Curtin University
4.    Ben Saunders; Curtin University
5.    Chris Dowling; Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (Fisheries WA)
6.    Daniela Waltrick; Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (Fisheries WA)
7.    Matias Braccini; Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (Fisheries WA)

The sandbar shark (Carcharhinus plumbeus) has a global distribution and is caught by commercial and recreational fishers. We
assessed the post-release survival of sandbar sharks caught in longline surveys conducted in Western Australia (WA) using an
integrated approach that combined the use of hook-timers, release condition staging, satellite tagging, and blood physiology
(adrenocorticotropic hormone, corticosterone, and lactate). Of the 57 individuals examined, 88% were “alive and strong” with
100% initial survival when released after a maximum of four hours on the hook. Of the 13 satellite-tagged individuals, 100%
survived. Sharks dived up to 307 m deep and showed cyclical depth movement patterns with some individuals moving up and
down the water column both day and night, while others moved almost exclusively at night, corresponding with the movement
patterns of squid, a common prey item of sandbar sharks. The concentration of blood metabolites did not show a linear pattern
with time on hook. The 100% survival rate within four hours on the hooks suggests the use of longlines for surveying sandbar
shark abundance has no deleterious consequences.

Keywords: stress physiology; sPAT tags; release condition; Chondrichthyes
SI Abstract Ref: 29




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 46
Leonardo Manir Feitosa
Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, 93117, USA.

Patterns and trends in the fate of sharks caught in global tuna fisheries
1.    Leonardo, Manir Feitosa; Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa
      Barbara, 93117, USA.
2.    Sara, Orofino; Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, 93117,
      United States; Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA; Environmental Markets
      Lab, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA.
3.    Echelle, Burns; Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, 93117,
      United States; Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA; Environmental Markets
      Lab, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA.
4.    Nidhi, D'Costa; Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada.
5.    Laurenne, Schiller; School of Public Policy and Administration, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel by Dr, Ottawa, ON K1S
      5B6, Canada.
6.    Darcy, Bradley; Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, 93117,
      United States; Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA; Environmental Markets
      Lab, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA.

Fisheries bycatch is a significant threat to shark populations worldwide. Thus, understanding bycatch fates – if an animal is
retained or discarded, dear or alive – is key information for estimating the bycatch impact on shark populations. Here, we
analyze the data on fates of sharks caught in the Convention Area of three tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organizations
(RFMO): Western Pacific (WCPFC), Indian (IOTC) and Atlantic (ICCAT) Oceans, to infer bycatch fate patterns between 2012
and 2018. We calculate fate proportions from each RFMO for 68 taxa identified at the genus or species level. We find
substantial variation in the reported categories and post-capture fates across RFMOs. No sharks were reported retained in
WCPFC, with sharks being either discarded alive (average 66%) or dead (average 33%). While live discards were the most
frequent in IOTC, they report 15% retention on average. Live discards show an increasing trend in ICCAT over the same
period, peaking at 25% in 2017. Given the different rates of observer coverage for each RFMO, we refrain from comparing
bycatch fates across them. Regarding CITES-listed species, we observed 100% live discards of whale sharks in ICCAT and
IOTC, while almost 100% retention of mako sharks caught by ICCAT managed vessels. Mako sharks were also the most
frequently retained species in IOTC. Overall, our analysis demonstrates that ICCAT represents most shark retention across
RFMOs, which primarily comprises mako sharks. We further note that our results are likely influenced by the scarcity of
available observer data, especially in IOTC and ICCAT.

Keywords: Fisheries bycatch; Selachii; tRFMOs; Catch retention; Fisheries discards
SI Abstract Ref: 208




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                        Page 47
Genetics 2


Juliana Klein
Molecular Breeding and Biodiversity Research Group, Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Private
Bag XI, Stellenbosch 7602, South Africa

Adaptive divergence despite high genetic connectivity in bronze whaler sharks (Carcharhinus
brachyurus) in Southern Africa
1.    Juliana, Klein; Molecular Breeding and Biodiversity Research Group, Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University,
      Private Bag XI, Stellenbosch 7602, South Africa
2.    Maduna, Simo; Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy Research (NIBIO), Division of Environment and Natural Resources,
      PO Box 115, NO-1431, Ås, Norway; Reel Science Coalition. Cape Town, South Africa
3.    Matthew, Dicken; KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, Private Bag 2, Umhlanga Rocks 4320, South Africa; Department of
      Development Studies, School of Economics, Development and Tourism, Nelson Mandela University, PO Box 77000, Port
      Elizabeth 6031, South Africa
4.    Charlene, da Silva; Department of Forestry, Fisheries and Environment, Private Bag X2, Rogge Bay 8012, South Africa
5.    Soekoe, Michelle; Reel Science Coalition. Cape Town, South Africa
6.    Meaghan, McCord; South African Shark Conservancy, Hermanus 7200, South Africa
7.    Warren, Potts; Department of Ichthyology and Fisheries Science, PO Box 94, Rhodes University, Grahamstown 6140,
      South Africa
8.    Aletta; Bester-van der Merwe; Molecular Breeding and Biodiversity Research Group, Department of Genetics,
      Stellenbosch University, Private Bag XI, Stellenbosch 7602, South Africa


The bronze whaler or copper shark (Carcharhinus brachyurus) is a large coastal shark with a wide distribution across a highly
heterogeneous environment and is one of the most exploited elasmobranchs in South Africa. Here the aim was to assess the
distribution of neutral and adaptive genomic diversity in this vulnerable species in the South-East Atlantic and South-West
Indian Ocean region using putatively neutral and candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Samples were collected
across a representative distribution range from the east coast of South Africa to Angola and prepared for massively parallel
sequencing on an Illumina platform using a restriction site-associated DNA (3RAD) library preparation protocol. Generated
sequencing reads were processed with an optimized bioinformatic pipeline and resulted in thousands of SNPs genotyped in 64
samples. The analyses of putatively neutral SNPs revealed moderate and evenly distributed levels of genomic diversity across
sampling sites. Multivariate and clustering analyses demonstrated a high degree of gene flow with no significant population
structuring among or within ocean basins. Genotype-environment analysis performed using redundancy analysis identified
SNPs significantly associated with mean sea surface temperature, pH and oxygen. These candidate SNPs indicated the
presence of at least two clusters and deep divergence between individuals from South Africa, Namibia and Angola. These
results provide evidence for local adaptation to specific environmental conditions in a highly mobile shark despite high levels of
gene flow. This is expected to inform management strategies and policy at the national and regional level for conservation of C.
brachyurus populations.

Keywords: Southern Africa; single nucleotide polymorphisms; genetic connectivity; genotype-environment association; adaptive
divergence
SI Abstract Ref: 255




Fola-Matthews, Omolara Opeyemi
University of Lagos, Nigeria.

Identification of shark species off the nigerian coast using dna barcoding
1.    Omolara, Fola-Matthews; University of Lagos, Nigeria
2.    Olufemi, Soyinka; University of Lagos, Nigeria
3.    Daphne, Bitalo; National Coffee Research Institute, Mukono Uganda.

Nigeria is one of the shark fishing nations in Africa, but its catch data on elasmobranchs are still recorded in aggregates
‘sharks’ and ‘rays’ with no further species-specific details. The major reason for this is most of the shark specimens look
identical in morphology and field identification of some closely related species is difficult. Also, fisheries managers and
scientists find it tricky to identify poorly preserved and deteriorating specimens or those lacking the key diagnostic features for
identification. This study used DNA barcoding as a method to identify shark species from four different landing areas off the
Nigerian Coast and two major fish markets in Lagos, Nigeria. 128 dorsal fins were sampled. 27 of these did not provide
successful sequence results, while 101 (77.7%) provided a Chondrichthyan sequence that was matched to reference
specimens in a DNA barcode database. Three species of sharks were identified, with all three of CITES importance, (17.8%
Critically Endangered, 61.4% Endangered, 20.8% Vulnerable). Fisheries managers can use this information to assist in
identification and make informed decisions on conservation and management issues.


Keywords: DNA barcoding; sharks; Nigeria; CITES; BOLD
SI Abstract Ref: 213




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 48
Franck Pichot
MARBEC

Development of a 12S marker gene database for the environmental DNA metabarcoding of marine
megafauna
PICHOT Franck

All living organisms leave traces of DNA in their environments. This DNA can be released through urine, gametes, blood,
mucus, skin loss etc. This DNA can be collected in the water column through filtration, and is then called environmental DNA or
eDNA. The metabarcoding of this eDNA is a new technicque which can then be used to accurately estimate marine biodiversity
with more accurate value, including rare, cryptic, elusive or invasive species.

The aim of this project is to obtain genetic sequences from sharks, skates, rays and marine mammals at a global scale with a
view to assign species to their 12S mitochondrion barcodes from eDNA samples. The barcode database is the cornerstone of
any eDNA study in conservation. Thus, we’re looking for collaborations with aquariums and museums worldwide to collect
tissues (fin clip (1.5 x 0.5 cm) on the caudal fin or blood (200μL) store in pure alcohol or frozen for missing species. With this
sample (at least two individuals from each species) we will be able to extract the DNA and then complete the 12S marker gene
database for these species. The advantage with this technique in addition to revealing the dark diversity is to be non-invasive
for the species. Ultimately it will improve the knowledge (biogeography, presence in marine reserves, depth) such a
collaboration would make it possible to take advantage of the competences of each one for a common objective: the
conservation of threatened species.

Keywords: eDNA; Elasmobranchs; monitoring; assessment; biodiversity
SI Abstract Ref: 196




Arnaud Gaigher
CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto, Portugal;
Research Unit for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Department of Biology, University of Hamburg, Germany.

Geographic distribution of MHC genetic diversity in the small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula)
1.  Arnaud, Gaigher; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto,
    Portugal.
2. Alessia, Rota; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto, Portugal.
3. Fabiana, Neves; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto,
    Portugal.
4. Pedro, Cardoso; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto,
    Portugal.
5. Andrew, Griffiths; School of Biosciences, University of Exeter, UK.
6. Samantha, Hook; University of Manchester, UK.
7. Sandra, Rebocho; University of Lisbon, Portugal.
8. Antonio, Muñoz-Mérida; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of
    Porto, Portugal.
9. Tereza, Almeida; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto,
    Portugal.
10. Teresa, Moura; Division of Modelling and Management of Fishery Resources (DivRP), Portuguese Institute for the Ocean
    and Atmosphere (IPMA), Algés, Portugal.
11. Bárbara, Serra Pereira; Division of Modelling and Management of Fishery Resources (DivRP), Portuguese Institute for the
    Ocean and Atmosphere (IPMA), Algés, Portugal.
12. Ana, Veríssimo; CIBIO-InBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, University of Porto,
    Portugal.

Due to their exceptional levels of functional genetic diversity, genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) represent
ideal candidates to reveal genetic differentiation among geographical regions and ultimately improving genetic stock
identification of commercially exploited shark species. In addition, from an evolutionary perspective, because of the major role
of MHC in pathogen resistance, MHC diversity can be expected to be locally adapted to pathogens, resulting in a more
pronounced genetic structure in these genes compared to neutral expectations. Alternatively, balancing selection at the
geographic scale can lead to a weaker genetic structure compared to the neutral population structure if, for instance, prevailing
pathogens are the same over the whole study area. To distinguish between these scenarios, we sequenced MHC-IIβ genes
using high-throughput sequencing technology in an extensive number of small-spotted catsharks (Scyliorhinus canicula)
sampled across the entire European geographic distribution (N=600). All samples were also genotyped with 11 neutral
microsatellite markers as a baseline to contrast with MHC diversity and genetic structure. Our preliminary results suggest that
this species has three different MHC-IIβ genes, with the typical characteristics of functional MHC-IIβ genes: high number of
alleles and high sequence divergence between alleles. We also show that MHC diversity in catsharks vary across regions,
probably involving both demographic and selective forces. This study provides interesting perspectives for the understanding of




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 49
evolutionary mechanisms involved in MHC diversity but also shows that the MHC system provides prime markers to stock
delimitation, which is essential knowledge for sustainable long-term management of vulnerable marine species.

Keywords: small-spotted catshark; differentiation genetic; major histocompatibility complex; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 187




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                   Page 50
Threats Beyond Overfishing 3


Alejandro Jesús Molera Arribas
IMEDMAR-UCV

The xenobiotic biomonitor potential of the small spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula): a year long
evaluation on heavy metal and microplastic accumulation.
1.    Alejandro Jesús Molera Arribas : IMEDMAR-UCV,
2.    Samuel Acevedo Quilis: IMEDMAR-UCV,
3.    José Gamez Perez: UJI (Universitat Jaume I),
4.    Ana Maria Hernandez Martinez: IMEDMAR-UCV,
5.    José Tena Medialdea: IMEDMAR-UCV

The small-spotted catshark Scyliorhinus canicula, is a demersal Scyliorhinid shark species commonly found in Mediterranean
and Northeastern Atlantic waters. The philopatric and sedentary nature of female S. canicula, along with its high abundance
among bottom trawl bycatch; stock exploitation resilience and widespread distribution could support the xenobiotic
biomonitoring potential of this species. A year long study was performed from November 2019 to November 2020 within which
300 mature female specimens were gathered. Intramuscular Cu, Pb and Cd concentrations were determined via graphite
furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy (GFAAS), while the digestive tract of each captured individual was pre-treated via
alkaline extraction and vacuum filtration for its subsequent visual characterisation and polymer species Identification via
RAMAN spectroscopy. Stable mean concentrations of Pb, Cd and Cu were observed in muscle tissues throughout the year
with significant differences occurring only between non consecutive months. Spatial analysis shows the existence of well-
defined heavy metal concentration hotspots occurring in certain points of the study site within which certain individuals
surpassed the 0.05 and 0.3 µg·g-1 (ww) maximum threshold for safe human consumption stablished by the European
commission Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006). Macroplastics, mesoplastic and microplastics were identified within Scyliorhinus
canicula gastric tracts with plastic counts ranging between 3 to 32 units. Different plastic polymers were identified, with a
higher presence of Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), Polyamide (PA) and polypropylene (PP).

Keywords: biomonitor; Scyliorhinus canicula; heavy metal; fisheries; microplastics
SI Abstract Ref: 363




Robert Bullock
Save Our Seas Foundation D'Arros Research Centre (SOSF-DRC), Rue Philippe Plantamour 20, 1201, Geneva,
Switzerland

Too hot to handle: Investigating the impacts of large-scale ocean warming events on the apparent
survival and body condition of juvenile shark populations
1.    Robert Bullock; Save Our Seas Foundation D'Arros Research Centre (SOSF-DRC), Rue Philippe Plantamour 20, 1201,
      Geneva, Switzerland.
2.    Ornella Weideli; (a) Dr Risch Medical Laboratory, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein, (b) PSL Research University, Université de
      Perpignan, 66860, Perpignan, France.

Global climate change has fundamental impacts on the structure and function of marine environments. Examining the
associated effects on threatened species using these environments is a major challenge for scientists and conservationists.
This study investigated the effects of the 2016 extreme temperature event on the apparent survival and body condition of
juvenile populations of two threatened carcharhinid shark species using a nursery habitat at St Joseph atoll, Seychelles. 228
blacktip reef sharks Carcharhinus melanopterus and 189 sicklefin lemon sharks Negaprion acutidens were caught during mark-
recapture experiments over four years from 2014-2017. Mark-recapture modelling was used to estimate apparent survival (φ)
and probability of recapture (p) for both species. Best-fit models indicated distinct differences around the 2016 thermal event
with a 12% reduction in apparent survival of C. melanopterus (φ - 2014 + 15 = 0.65, φ - 2016+2017 = 0.53) and a 14%
reduction in N. acutidens (φ – 2014, 15, 17 = 0.82, φ - 2016 = 0.68). Fulton’s condition factor was used estimate changes in
body condition over the study period and evidenced significant decreases in body condition around the thermal event for both
species. Findings from this study indicate a significant effect of large-scale ocean warming events on the fitness and survival of
juvenile shark populations. How to tackle this ubiquitous threat will be a key question for shark science moving forward.

Keywords: mark-recapture; ocean warming; elasmobranch; survival; nursery site
SI Abstract Ref: 309




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 51
Jessica Savage
Royal Holloway University of London; Institute of Zoology; Zoological Society of London

Assessing the global geographical overlap between filter-feeding megafaunal elasmobranchs and plastic
pollution
1.    Jessica, Savage; Royal Holloway University of London.
2.    Tom B., Letessier; Institute of Zoology.
3.    David, Morritt; Royal Holloway University of London.
4.    Marcus, Rowcliffe; Institute of Zoology.
5.    Heather, Koldewey; Zoological Society of London.

Plastic is ubiquitous in the environment and is known to have negative impacts on marine ecosystems. Marine organisms can
entangle in discarded fishing gear, ingest plastic debris, and accumulate leached toxic chemicals in their tissues. Filter-feeding
megafaunal elasmobranchs, including the reef manta ray (Mobula alfredi), giant manta ray (Mobula birostris), whale shark
(Rhincodon typus) and basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) are exposed to the risk of plastic pollution, due to their low trophic
level and their habitat overlap with known areas of plastic accumulation. They are also important flagship species for
conservation with an additional value for ecotourism.
This piece of work explores the global geographical overlap between these species and plastic distribution to identify the
populations at risk. We use publicly available databases of species occurrences to build a maximum entropy distribution model
for the four species. We then overlay those with plastic debris data, including macroplastics such as discarded fishing gear, and
microplastics distributions from existing plastic dispersal model outputs. This allows us to calculate the exposure of the four
species to the risks of plastic ingestion and entanglement in discarded fishing gear.
This overlap analysis will allow us to build testable predictions of ingestion and entanglement risk based on overlap between
debris and filter-feeder distributions, and in the future assess these predictions by evaluating existing evidence of exposure at
different locations. We also hope the results of this study will focus mitigation policies and actions to the relevant priority
locations.

Keywords: plastic pollution; filter-feeder; Elasmobranch; Maxent model; risk assessment
SI Abstract Ref: 172




Clemency White
University of Exeter

Fish and ships: Soundscaping urban shark nurseries
1.    Clemency, White; University of Exeter
2.    Catherine, Hobbs; University of Exeter
3.    Andrew, Radford; University of Bristol
4.    Matthew, Witt; University of Exeter
5.    Steve, Simpson; University of Bristol


Sound in the marine environment is used across taxa to inform behaviour, however human activities now often pollute natural
cuescapes, masking or modifying important information. Anthropogenic disruption of marine sensory landscapes is known to
negatively affect the distribution, behaviour and physiology of marine mammals, teleost fish and various invertebrate phyla.
While relatively little is known about the mechanisms and capabilities of hearing in sharks, multiple studies have shown that
they detect and respond (physiologically and behaviourally) to low frequency sounds (<1500 Hz). During juvenile development ,
sharks often display site fidelity to coastal habitats, such as mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass beds, where human
disturbance can often be concentrated. One extreme example of this is in the Biscayne Bay, Miami, USA, where there is a high
density and diversity of sharks along a heavily developed coastline with high levels of boating activity. Understanding which
sounds sharks detect, respond to and are influenced by in situ has received little attention. To address this knowledge gap, we
present the characterisation of the Biscayne Bay soundscape from an elasmobranch perspective (i.e. mapping spatial and
temporal patterns of acoustic conditions at low frequencies , including in the particle motion domain). Specific attention is paid
to describing the biological and anthropogenic contributions to the soundscape that fall within known hearing sensitivities. Our
results are discussed in the context of potential ecological roles of sound in shark ecology and the impacts of anthropogenic
noise on sharks. We will use this opportunity to open conversations on how deepening our understanding of elasmobranch
sensory systems and multi-sensory integration may be applied to conservation initiatives.

Keywords: bioacoustics; shark nurseries; soundscape; pollution; sensory ecology
SI Abstract Ref: 166




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 52
Chiara Romano
University of Calabria; University of Messina; ARPAT Livorno1

Plastic ingestion in two syntopic species of deep-sea sharks from central Mediterranean
1.    Chiara, Romano; University of Calabria
2.    Giorgia, Zicarelli; University of Messina
3.    Carmen, Valentino; University of Calabria
4.    Samira, Gallo; University of Calabria
5.    Sharon, Chiriaco; University of Calabria
6.    Gianni, Giglio; University of Calabria
7.    Francesco Luigi, Leonetti; University of Calabria
8.    Cecilia, Mancusi; ARPAT Livorno
9.    Emilio, Sperone; University of Calabria

Plastics are synthetic materials made by long-life polymers, that persist for hundreds of years in the environment. This is the
real plastic pollution problem. Every year enormous amounts of plastic debris are poured in the marine environment. In this
work we investigated the presence of plastic remains in the stomach contents of three populations of Scyliorhinus canicula and
Galeus melastomus, two of the most common deep demersal shark species in Mediterranean, along the Tyrrhenian coast of
Italy. Both shark species have an opportunistic benthic scavenger behaviour. We obtained animals thanks to MEDITS survey
and stomach contents were analysed in laboratory under a microscope. We discriminated plastic by shape (fibres, scrapes,
sphere, and film) and colour (orange, black, white, blue, yellow, red, grey and green). The most common plastic remains
founded in stomach were
- scrapes in both sharks’ populations in Lazio
- film for lesser spotted dogfish and fibres for blackmouth catshark in Tuscany
- fibers for Scyliorhinus canicula and films for Galeus melastomus in Liguria.
About colour discrimination, Scyliorhinus canicula ingested more grey and yellow plastics in the three populations than Galeus
melastomus, which ingested, on the contrary, more black and white fragments. Ingestion seemed to be accidental for shapes,
but for colours maybe the feeding behaviour of the two species could affect the choice.

Keywords: plastic; deep-sea sharks; mediterranean
SI Abstract Ref: 140




Charlotte Birkmanis
The University of Western Australia

Shark occurrence around Australia: now and into the future
1.    Charlotte Birkmanis, The University of Western Australia.
2.    Jennifer Freer, British Antarctic Survey.
3.    Julian Partridge, The University of Western Australia.
4.    Leigh Simmons, The University of Western Australia
5.    Michelle Heupel, Australian Institute of Marine Science and James Cook University.
6.    Ana Sequeira, The University of Western Australia.

Many of the world’s shark populations are in decline indicating the need for improved conservation and management. A better
understanding of their distribution and habitat requirements is vital for habitat protection and effective fisheries management,
essential to maintain viable populations. Alongside this, oceans are warming worldwide and how such temperature variation will
influence sharks requires investigation. We used statistical modelling tools to assess occurrence, habitat suitability and
potential climate change effects for pelagic sharks from the Carcharhinidae and Lamnidae families in Australian waters and the
adjacent high seas using shark occurrence records compiled from offshore commercial fisheries. We collated environmental
and spatial predictors known to affect shark occurrence and developed generalised linear models to determine the extent of
suitable habitat for pelagic sharks within the Australian continental Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). As well managed and
appropriately located marine protected areas (MPAs) may enhance shark conservation, we quantified the amount of suitable
habitat contained within existing MPAs. Our results indicate sea surface temperature (SST) to be a significant predictor of
pelagic shark distribution, and even though highly suitable habitat was limited in MPA zones closed to fishing, Australia has
strict fisheries legislation protecting pelagic sharks. With SST an important determinant of pelagic shark habitat suitability, we
then examined the impact of increasing ocean temperatures in the future using an ensemble of climate models under two
emission scenarios. Our predictions highlight how future SSTs are likely to shift the location of suitable pelagic shark habitat for
both shark families within the Australian EEZ.

Keywords: conservation; marine protected areas; statistical modelling; fisheries; climate change
SI Abstract Ref 47




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 53
Olga Novillo-Sanjuan
Associació LAMNA - Universitat de València

Assessment of metal pollution in batoids near a western Mediterranean coastal lagoon

1. Olga Novillo-Sanjuan; Associació LAMNA - Universitat de València
2. Jaime Penadés Suay; Associació LAMNA - Universitat de València

Concerning pollution, non-essential metals have been historically present in the Mediterranean, sometimes reaching levels that
could be harmful for marine biota. Despite the fact that batoids are a significant part of Mediterranean food webs, little is known
about the threats that this metal pollution may represent to this group. In this study, we analyzed mercury (Hg), lead (Pb) and
cadmium (Cd), in livers and muscle from 90 batoids of three different species: Dasyatis pastinaca (N=30), Myliobatis aquila
(N=30) and, Torpedo torpedo (N=30). Our aim was to quantify these metals in a historically polluted area, the coast next to
l’Albufera (East Spain), a coastal lagoon that discharges water into the sea. Besides, we studied whether metal concentration
could be correlated with the different position in the food web of these species and with their size. In general, mercury was the
most abundant metal, closely followed by lead and, lastly, cadmium was found in very low concentrations (mean±SD w.w. in
muscle: 31.4±11.2 µg/g of Hg; 16.51±4.8 µg/g of Pb and 0.33±0.2 µg/g of Cd; in liver: 31.4±11.2 µg/g of Hg; 16.51±4.8 µg/g of
Pb and 0.33±0.2 µg/g of Cd). Regarding biometric parameters, D. pastinaca and T. torpedo showed the highest metal
concentration; in accordance to their higher position in the foodweb, in comparison with M. aquila. Results indicate that these
batoids do not seem to be threatened by metals in the area, possibly reflecting either a low metallic pollution of their
surroundings or their low mobilization from the sediments.


Keywords: batoids; metal pollution; food web; bioaccumulation
SI Abstract Ref: 274




Romaric Jac
Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research)

Moving North, season 1 - Are deep-sea sharks affected by warming water?

Continental shelf and deep ocean waters are subjected to anthropogenic pressures such as fishing and climate change-related
environmental stressors. Sharks s in temperate waters are predicted to move poleward in response to climate change.
However, their distribution through space and time remains poorly understood, limiting the potential to understand how they are
responding to environmental stressors. Knowledge of the abundance and its environmental drivers of this threatened marine
group is needed to inform sustainable management. Generalized additive models and mapping were performed on a 26-year
scientific survey time-series in the Norwegian Sea and environmental data to model the impact of climate change on the
distribution and abundance of two shark species living in deep and cold waters: Etmopterus spinax, and Galeus melastomus, at
the northern fringe of their ranges, together with the distribution of their potential prey species. Both shark species significantly
shifted their abundance northwards, and local abundances have declined to various degrees over the last seven years. The
warming of northern waters across the last three decades seems the main driver of a northward shift in the local abundance of
these two shark species and their prey. This indicates that climate change is likely a major driver of large-scale abundance
patterns for sharks, even among deep-sea species. In a global warming context, survey data, long-term series and international
cooperation are required to record extended shifts and better conserve transboundary species.

Keywords: Climate change, Community shift, Barents and Norwegian Sea ecoregions, Species distribution modelling,
Transboundary conservation




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                          Page 54
Genetics 3


Floriaan Devloo-Delva
Australian National Fish Collection, NCMI, CSIRO

From rivers to ocean basins: Global population structure of the Bull Shark
1.    Floriaan, Devloo-Delva; Australian National Fish Collection, CSIRO; School of Natural Sciences, University of Tasmania.
2.    Christopher, Burridge; School of Natural Sciences, University of Tasmania.
3.    Peter, Kyne; Research Institute for the Environment and Livelihoods, Charles Darwin University.
4.    Juerg, Brunnschweiler; Independent Researcher.
5.    Demian , Chapman; Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University.
6.    Patricia, Charvet; Universidade Federal do Paraná - UFPR - Programa de Pós-Graduação em Engenharia Ambiental.
7.    Xiao, Chen; College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University.
8.    Geremy, Cliff; KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board; School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal.
9.    Ryan, Daly; Oceanographic Research Institute, South African Association for Marine Biological Research; South African
      Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.
10.   J. Marcus, Drymon; Coastal Research and Extension Center, Mississippi State University; Mississippi-Alabama Sea Grant
      Consortium.
11.   Mario, Espinoza; Centro de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología & Escuela de Biología, Universidad de Costa
      Rica.
12.   Daniel, Fernando; Blue Resources Trust.
13.   Laura, Garcia Barcia; Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University.
14.   Kerstin, Glaus; Faculty of Science, Technology and Environment, School of Marine Studies, The University of the South
      Pacific.
15.   Blanca Idalia , González-Garza; Centro de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional.
16.   Michael, Grant; College of Science and Engineering, Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, James
      Cook University.
17.   Rasanthi M., Gunasekera; Oceans and Atmosphere, CSIRO.
18.   Sebastian, Hernandez; Biomolecular Laboratory, Center for International Programs, Universidad VERITAS.
19.   Susumu, Hyodo; Laboratory of Physiology, Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo.
20.   Rima, Jabado; Elasmo Project.
21.   Sébastien, Jaquemet; Laboratoire ENTROPIE, UMR 9220 CNRS/IRD/Université de La Réunion.
22.   Grant, Johnson; Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries, Aquatic Resource Research Unit.
23.   James, Ketchum; MigraMar; Pelagios-Kakunja.
24.   Hélène, Magalon; Laboratoire ENTROPIE, UMR 9220 CNRS/IRD/Université de La Réunion.
25.   James, Marthick; Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania.
26.   Frederik, Mollen; Elasmobranch Research.
27.   Stefano, Mona; Institut de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité, ISYEB, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle; CNRS,
      Sorbonne Université; EPHE, Université des Antilles; EPHE, PSL Research University.
28.   Gavin, Naylor; Florida Museum of Natural History; University of Florida.
29.   John, Nevill; Environment Seychelles.
30.   Nicole, Phillips; School of Biological, Environmental, and Earth Sciences, The University of Southern Mississippi.
31.   Richard, Pillans; Oceans and Atmosphere, CSIRO.
32.   Bautisse, Postaire; Laboratoire ENTROPIE, Université de La Réunion.
33.   Amy, Smoothey; NSW Department of Primary Industries, Fisheries Research, Sydney Institute of Marine Science.
34.   Katsunori, Tachihara; Laboratory of Fisheries Biology and Coral Reef Studies, Faculty of Science, University of Ryukyus.
35.   Bree, Tillet; Translational Research Institute, University of Queensland, Diamantina Institute.
36.   Jorge, Valerio; Centro de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología & Escuela de Biología, Universidad de Costa
      Rica.
37.   Pierre, Feutry; Oceans and Atmosphere, CSIRO.

The Bull Shark, Carcharhinus leucas, faces varying levels of exploitation in fisheries and shark control programs around the
world. Baseline information regarding the species’ life-history, reproductive behaviour and global or regional connectivity is
crucial to evaluate fishery impacts and its conservation status. In this study, we obtained samples from nearly 1,000 sharks
from 19 different sampling locations for the first global-scale assessment of population structure in this cosmopolitan species.
Using a recently developed DNA capture approach (DArTcap), all samples were genotyped for 3,400 nuclear markers. In
addition, the full mitochondrial genomes of 384 Indo-Pacific samples were also sequenced. Reproductive isolation was inferred
at an ocean basin scale (eastern Pacific, western Atlantic, eastern Atlantic, Indo-West Pacific) with signals of separate island
populations (Japan and Fiji). Bull Sharks appear to maintain reproductive connectivity using shallow coastal waters as dispersal
corridors, whereas large oceanic distances and historical land bridges act as barriers. The removal of Bull Sharks from insular
populations, such as Japan and Fiji, may precipitate local decline that cannot readily be replenished by immigration, which can
in turn affect ecosystem dynamics. We note that females tend to return to the same area for reproduction, which makes them
more vulnerable to local threats and an important focus for management actions. Finally, we provide new genetic markers that
can assign provenance and sex from DNA samples which will prove valuable for future monitoring of the international fin and
meat trade.

Keywords: genetic connectivity; close-kin; fisheries forensics
SI Abstract Ref: 109




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                         Page 55
Emily Humble
University of Edinburgh & The Manta Trust

Uncovering the mysteries of manta rays using genomics
1.    Emily Humble; The University of Edinburgh & The Manta Trust
2.    Jane Hosegood; The Manta Trust & Bangor University. 2. Guy Stevens; The Manta Trust.
3.    Mark de Bruyn; Bangor University & The University of Sydney
4.    Simon Creer; Bangor University
5.    Gary Carvalho; Bangor University
6.    Amelia Armstrong; University of Queensland
7.    Ramon Bonfil; Océanos Vivientes A. C.
8.    Mark Deakos; Hawaii Association for Marine Education and Research (HAMER)
9.    Daniel Fernando; Blue Resources Trust
10.   Niv Froman; The Manta Trust
11.   Lauren Peel; Save Our Seas Foundation, D’Arros Research Centre
12.   Stephen Pollett; The Manta Trust
13.   Joshua Rambahiniarison; Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute Philippines
14.   Alessandro Ponzo; Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute Philippines
15.   Helen Senn; RZSS WildGenes
16.   Joshua Stewart; Oregon State University & The Manta Trust
17.   Sabine Wintner; KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board & University of KwaZulu-Natal
18.   Rob Ogden; The University of Edinburgh

Oceanic (Mobula birostris) and reef manta rays (Mobula alfredi) are among the most iconic species in our oceans yet significant
knowledge gaps remain about fundamental aspects of their biology. For example, it remains a mystery both how their
widespread distributions have arisen and the extent to which populations are connected within them. This information is crucial
not only for establishing appropriate spatial scales for management, but for assessing population viability into the future. We
address this using high-resolution genomic data for over 200 manta ray samples (M. birostris: n = 120, M. alfredi: n = 126)
collected from across their entire distribution. We show that despite their recent divergence, oceanic and reef mantas display
striking differences in population structure at a global scale, which is associated with significantly different levels of genetic
diversity both between and within species. These findings indicate fundamental differences in colonisation strategy and
migratory behaviour and highlight potentially vulnerable populations in need of heightened protection. We will examine these
results in light of what is currently known about manta rays and discuss our findings in the context of global conservation
management.

Keywords: manta rays; genetics; conservation; connectivity; management
SI Abstract Ref: 95




Kim Eustache
École Pratique des Hautes Études / CRIOBE UMR3278 / University of Amsterdam

Genealogy reconstruction for a blacktip reef shark population to reveal life history traits and
reproductive patterns
1.    Kim, Eustache; École Pratique des Hautes Études / CRIOBE UMR3278 / University of Amsterdam
2.    Serge, Planes; CNRS/École Pratique des Hautes Études / CRIOBE UMR3278

Blacktip reef sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus) are a widespread Indo-Pacific reef shark species listed as vulnerable on the
IUCN Red List for endangered species because of poaching, habitat loss and anthropogenic perturbations. Around the Island
of Moorea (French Polynesia), the Center for Island Research and Environmental Observatory (CRIOBE) sampled 1700 adult
and juvenile blacktip reef shark fin clips over a 13-year timespan. In Moorea, blacktip reef sharks give birth in shallow coastal
lagoon areas, enabling neonate and juvenile sharks to withstand predation and to find sufficient foraging resources. For this
PhD project, parentage analysis was conducted on the 1700 fin clip samples using genetic analyses (microsatellite DNA
markers) to reconstruct the pedigree of the population. The resulting genealogy aims at defining life history traits such as the
number of juveniles per litter, mother offspring resource allocation at birth (by using body condition and blood metabolite data),
longevity and juvenile survival rates. The pedigree will also enable to evaluate the recruitment success of adult individuals
(when offspring of an adult individual reaches adulthood), natal philopatry (females returning to their birthplace to parturition) in
adult female individuals and the presence of dominant individuals (individuals which, on average, have higher reproduction
rates) within the population. The results will provide a better understanding of the functioning of blacktip reef shark populations
making it possible to provide information to local decision makers on the best strategies that can be developed to improve reef
shark conservation.

Keywords: reef sharks; genetic analysis; genealogy; pedigree analysis; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 79




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 56
Emma Williams
Celtic Deep, Marine Conservation & Research Foundation, Newcastle University

Non-capture methods reveal blue shark population genetics in the UK
1.    Emma Williams,
2.    Gonzalo Araujo,
3.    James Kitson,
4.    Evelyn Jensen,
5.    Richard Rees

Despite blue sharks (Prionace glauca) being the most prevalent and most fished of any shark species, our understanding of
their population genetic structure is limited. Large-scale genetic sampling is an important tool for the conservation and
management of vulnerable and elusive species and can provide greater insight into estimates of population structure,
abundance, and even behavioural ecology. While traditional genetics studies have relied more heavily on invasive techniques
and expertise, novel non-invasive genetic sampling can offer an effective substitute. Furthermore, less invasive techniques
have the potential to increase genetic studies’ applications whilst reducing costs. This study determined the efficacy and
application of using a novel non-invasive technique to collect genetic material from free-swimming blue sharks for population
genetic studies. The study took place in the Celtic Sea, UK, where we collected 39 epidermal swabs from a total of 11 free-
swimming blue sharks using a toothbrush and freediving approach. Regions of the mitochondrial CO1 and control region, and
nuclear ribosomal ITS2 regions, were successfully amplified from the samples. Results across all three markers support the
existence of low genetic variation between regions, however, genetic structuring remains a possibility that requires further
investigation. Results from the mitochondrial control region showed the correct identification of individuals across multiple
samples, demonstrating this method’s application for long-term mark-recapture studies. We recommend future studies
investigate contamination mitigation, improvement of amplification techniques, and determine the application of samples for
other population genomics analyses, such as high throughput sequencing.

Keywords: non-invasive; Prionace glauca; genetics; novel; DNA
SI Abstract Ref: 68




Timo Michael Staeudle
Wageningen University & Research

Genetic diversity and population structure of Raja clavata in the North-East Atlantic
1.    Timo, Staeudle; Wageningen University & Research.
2.    Jurgen Batsleer; Wageningen Marine Research.
3.    Jim Ellis; CEFAS.
4.    Eleanore Greenway; Wageningen University & Research.
5.    Pascal, Lorence; Ifremer.
6.    Hendrik-Jan, Megens; Wageningen University & Research.
7.    Klaas Sys; ILVO.
8.    Verena, Trenkel; Ifremer.
9.    Jan Jaap, Poos; Wageningen University & Research.

Thornback Ray (Raja clavata) is a relatively abundant commercial skate species occurring in coastal waters of the North-East
Atlantic and Mediterranean, listed by the IUCN as Near Threatened. It is the dominant skate species caught in commercial
fisheries in northern European seas. Historically, regional population declines have been observed, although increased
landings indicate increases in population size in several areas over recent decades.
This study describes the genetic diversity and population structure of Raja clavata hierarchically among ecoregions, spanning
the Greater North Sea (GNS), Celtic Sea (CS), and Bay of Biscay and Iberian coast (BB), as well as within ecoregions by ICES
Divisions. Over 8000 samples were collected (2004 – 2022) and genotyped. Subsequent quality control resulted in a SNP
dataset of >4000 SNPs for analyses.
Estimates of genetic diversity are provided among and within ecoregions. Small yet significant genetic differentiation was
evident globally (Fst,global = 0.0042) and among all ecoregions via pairwise Fst (Fst,GNS-CS = 0.003, Fst,CS-BB = 0.007,
Fst,GNS-BB = 0.009; p-values < 0.01). Only ICES Divisions 4b and 4c in the GNS (Fst,4b-4c = 0.00004, p = 0.144) showed no
significant genetic differentiation within ecoregions. AMOVA, discriminant component analysis, and admixture modelling
provide further evidence and describe the population structure on both hierarchical population levels investigated.
This is the largest known genetic study of Raja clavata, to our knowledge. This research helps to inform stock identification and
thus assessment, conservation and fisheries management, by accounting for genetic population structure at different spatial
scales in the North-East Atlantic.

Keywords: population structure; genetics; SNP; elasmobranch; North-East Atlantic
SI Abstract Ref: 62




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 57
Threatened Species - Spotlight on Mackerel Sharks 2


Francesca Romana Reinero
Sharks Studies Center-Scientific Institute, 58024 Massa Marittima, Italy; Department of Biology, Ecology and
Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy; Department of Political Science and CEFOP-LUISS,
LUISS Guido Carli University, 00197 R

Influence of environmental factors on prey discrimination of bait-attracted white sharks from Gansbaai,
South Africa
1.    Francesca Romana, Reinero; Sharks Studies Center-Scientific Institute, 58024 Massa Marittima, Italy
2.    Emilio, Sperone; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy
3.    Gianni, Giglio; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy
4.    Antonio, Pacifico; Department of Political Science and CEFOP-LUISS, LUISS Guido Carli University, 00197 Rome, Italy
5.    Primo, Micarelli; Sharks Studies Center-Scientific Institute, 58024 Massa Marittima, Italy

Influence of environmental factors on prey discrimination of bait-attracted white sharks were studied over a six-year period
(2008-2013) at Dyer Island Nature Reserve (Gansbaai, South Africa). This work deepens previous published study on surface
predatory behaviour of bait-attracted white sharks conducted in the same area where, from 240 predator-prey interactions
observed in the same period, both immature and mature white sharks were attracted from the seal shaped decoy rather than
the tuna bait, except for the years 2008 and 2011. Tide ranges, underwater visibility, water temperature, and sea conditions
are, in decreasing order, the factors that drive white sharks to the prey choice. High tide reduces the minimum depth from
which sharks could approach seals close to the shore, while a good visibility helps the sharks to use their vision ability to
implement predatory choices to energetical richer prey, the odorless seal shaped decoy. On the contrary, warmer water is
associated both with an increasing and diversity of teleosts which are prey of white sharks and to an increase of phytoplankton
that reduces the underwater visibility, driving them to the tuna bait choice. Finally, sea condition was almost always slightly
rough, ensuring a good average underwater visibility. Recommendations for future research work at this site are presented.

Keywords: Elasmobranch; environmental effects; predation; prey choice; sensory ecology
SI Abstract Ref: 64




Simon Berrow
1; Irish Basking shark Group, Merchants Quay, Kilrush, Co Clare, V15 E762, Ireland 2; Marine and Freshwater
Research Group, Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Road, Ireland

Annual courtship ‘torus’ behaviour of basking sharks Cetorhinus maximus identified in Irish waters
1.  David W. Sims, Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB, UK
2.  Simon D. Berrow, Irish Basking shark Group, Merchants Quay, Kilrush, Co Clare, V15 E762, Ireland
3.  Ken M. O’Sullivan, Woodview Park, Ennistymon, Clare, Ireland
4.  Nicholas J. Pfeiffer, MERC Ecological Consultants, Loughaunbeg, Inverin, Galway, Ireland
5.  Richard Collins, Irish Basking shark Group, Merchants Quay, Kilrush, Co Clare, V15 E762, Ireland
6.  Kev L. Smith, Woodview Park, Ennistymon, Clare, Ireland
7.  Brianna M. Pfeiffer, MERC Ecological Consultants, Loughaunbeg, Inverin, Galway, Ireland
8.  Paul Connery, MERC Ecological Consultants, Loughaunbeg, Inverin, Galway, Ireland
9.  Nuno Queiroz, CIBIO/InBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos/Rede de Investigação em
    Biodiversidade e Biologia Evolutiva, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-668 Vairão, Portugal
10. Nicolas E. Humphries, Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1
    2PB, UK
11. Freya C. Womersley,
12. Emily J. Southall Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB,
    UK

Many elasmobranchs exhibit complex courtship rituals. The function of large aggregations of basking sharks engaged in circling
behaviour largely remains a mystery. We present, underwater and aerial video recordings of multiple circling groups of basking
sharks in late summer (August to September) during years 2016–2021 in Ireland. Groups comprised females and males
numbering between 6 and 23 individuals that were not filter feeding. Grouped sharks swam slowly in a clockwise or
anticlockwise rotating ‘torus’ (diameter range: 17–39 m) consisting of circling individuals layered vertically from the surface to a
maximum depth of 16 m. Within a torus, sharks engaged in close-following, echelon, close flank-approach or parallel swimming
behaviours. Total body lengths of circling sharks overlapped known lengths of sexually mature individuals. In some toruses
female body coloration was paler than that of males. Within a torus individuals associated with most other members rapidly
(within minutes) indicating toroidal behaviours facilitate multiple interactions. Torus members also interacted through fin-fin and
fin-body contacts, rolling to expose ventral surfaces to following sharks, and breaching behaviour. We also confirmed that a
torus forms from shark following behaviour, and can change rotation direction frequently. Collectively, our observations explain
a courtship function for non-feeding circling groups. This study highlights the importance of coastal waters off western Ireland
as critical habitats supporting courtship reproductive behaviour of endangered basking sharks, the first such habitats identified
for this species globally. This has important conservation implications for a species recently given legal protection status in
Ireland.




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 58
Keywords: basking shark; courtship; torus; behaviour; Ireland
SI Abstract Ref: 89



Sofia Gabriel
Quantitative Marine Science Program, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
TAS, Australia

Fine-scale spatial usage of a coastal beach area by white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) as estimated
by a Hidden Markov Model informed by acoustic array data
1.    Sofia, Gabriel; Quantitative Marine Science Program, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
      Hobart, TAS, Australia
2.    Paige, Eveson; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia
3.    Russ, Bradford; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia
4.    David, Moreno; Fisheries and Aquaculture Centre, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
      Hobart, TAS, Australia
5.    Jayson, Semmens; Fisheries and Aquaculture Centre, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
      Hobart, TAS, Australia
6.    Toby, Patterson; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia

White shark movements are typically observed over large spatial scales (100s-1000s km2). However, observation of fine-scale
movement behaviour of white sharks is necessary to improve our understanding of their usage of near-shore coastal areas
where there is an increased probability of interactions between sharks and humans. Based on passive acoustic data from a
dense, but non-triangulating, array we investigated the fine scale movement of white sharks at a coastal beach within a nursery
area off Hawk’s Nest, New South Wales from 2010-2015. Using a spatial Hidden Markov Model (HMM) we were able to
estimate white shark movement tracks during each shark visit to the array based on detection binning over 5-minute time
intervals. The HMM also enabled direct estimation of the probability of detection as a function of distance from shark to acoustic
receivers. The HMM-estimated movement tracks predict heavy utilisation of very shallow water close to the high-water mark by
the sharks. Additionally, the southern end of the beach appears to be a focus for short term white shark residency at the beach.
The movement tracks estimated here allowed the first high-resolution investigation of white shark movements in the Hawk’s
Nest nursery area and demonstrate the potential for estimation of fine-scale position data from non-triangulating passive
acoustic monitoring arrays deployed in other coastal marine areas.

Keywords: Hidden Markov Models; animal movement; acoustic telemetry; Carcharodon carcharias
SI Abstract Ref: 130




Chelsea Gray and Emmett Johnston
Irish Basking Shark Group; George Mason University and Irish Basking Shark Group; Queen's University Belfast;
National Parks and Wildlife Service

Making a Difference: how to realize policy change.
1.    Chelsea Gray; Irish Basking Shark Group; George Mason University and
2.    Emmett Johnston; Irish Basking Shark group; Queen's University Belfast; National Parks and Wildlife Service

Shark research and conservation efforts are typically driven by a desire to inform the status assessment and increase the level
of protection afforded to the target species. However, the translation of scientific findings and or conservation initiatives into real
world policy change is a persistent challenge for non-governmental organisations and academics. Basking sharks are listed by
the IUCN as globally endangered. Ireland is significant to basking sharks in the Northeast Atlantic, however until 2022, they
were not protected under domestic legislation. To help others overcome this disconnect we describe and review the methods
that the Irish Basking Shark Group (IBSG), a volunteer research and outreach organisation, deployed to realize a change in
legislative status for the species in Irish waters.
Between 2009 and 2022 the IBSG delivered approximately forty research, outreach and legislative change initiatives designed
to raise the awareness, understanding and appreciation of basking sharks in Irish and International waters. No individual action
or effort stream (i.e., public outreach, scientific research or political lobbying) delivered alone. Rather an integrated approach
that melded internationally significant research studies with locally orientated ocean literacy initiates’ and strategically timed
media campaigns provided the maximum leverage of policy makers.
Lastly, we consider how these experiences can be applied to other species or scaled up to regional forums. Our goal here is to
provide a road map for similar conservation efforts through sharing our experience in attaining protection for the basking shark
in Irish wildlife legislation, the first fish to be given this status.

Keywords: basking shark; science communication; conservation; policy; outreach
SI Abstract Ref: 209




                                                                      Sharks International 2022                           Page 59
Behaviour, Physiology & Discard Survival 2


Lucy Harding
Trinity College Dublin

Capture heats up sharks
1.    Lucy, Harding; Trinity College Dublin
2.    Austin, Gallagher; Beneath the Waves
3.    Andrew, Jackson; Trinity College Dublin
4.    Jenny, Bortoluzzi; Trinity College Dublin
5.    Haley, R, Dolton; Trinity College Dublin
6.    Brendan, Shea; Beneath the Waves
7.    Luke, Harman; University College Cork
8.    David, Edwards; West Cork Charters
9.    Nicholas, Payne; Trinity College Dublin

Catch-and-release fishing is an important component of ecotourism industries and scientific research worldwide, but its total
impact on animal physiology, health and survival is understudied for many species of sharks. We combined biologging and
blood chemistry to explore how this fisheries interaction influenced the physiology of two widely distributed, highly migratory
shark species: blue sharks (Prionace glauca), and tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier). Nineteen sharks were caught by drum line
or rod-and-reel angling; subcutaneous body temperature measurements were taken immediately upon capture, with 6
individuals also providing subsequent subcutaneous body temperature measurements via biologging as they swam freely for
several hours post-release. We found that short-term capture caused shark body temperature to increase significantly and
rapidly, with increases of 0.6 – 2.7°C for blue sharks (mean 1.2 ± 0.6°C) and 0.5 – 0.9°C for tiger sharks (mean 0.7 ± 0.2°C),
and with capture-induced heating rates of blue sharks averaging 0.3°C min-1 but as high as 0.8°C min-1. These heating rates
were 3-8 times faster than maximum rates encountered by our biologging sharks swimming through thermally stratified waters.
Biologging data showed that body temperatures underwent gradual decline after release, returning to match water
temperatures approximately 10 – 40 mins post-release. Blood biochemistry showed variable lactate/glucose levels following
capture; however, these concentrations weren’t correlated with the magnitude of body temperature increase, nor body size or
hooking time. These perturbations of the natural state could have immediate and longer-term effects on the welfare and
ecology of sharks caught and future research could focus on exploring these effects.

Keywords: catch-and-release; body temperature; thermal ecology; physiology; capture
SI Abstract Ref: 96




Hannah Medd
American Shark Conservancy

The recreational shore-based shark fishery in Florida, USA; catch rates, mortality rates and updates
1.    Hannah B. Medd; American Shark Conservancy
2.    Emma Kent; Carleton University
3.    Jessika D. Guay; Carleton University
4.    Jacqueline M. Chapman; Carleton University
5.    Vivian M. Nguyen; Carleton University