e
based on commercially significant and conservation prior species. When batoids are extremely susceptible to population
decline from overexploitation, a species-specific list of batoids exploited in the fishery is inevitable. We recorded 45 species of
batoids (under genus Benthobatis, Narcine, Torpedo, Tetronarce, Narke, Dipturus, Orbiraja, Acroteriobatus, Rhinobatos,
Glaucostegus, Rhynchobatus, Rhina, Gymnura, Plesiobatis, Brevitrygon, Himantura, Pateobatis, Pteroplatytrygon, Maculabatis,
Urogymnus, Neotrygon, Taeniurops, Aetobatus, Rhinoptera and Mobula) from the major and minor harbours and landing
centre’s along the coast of 4 leading maritime states in south Indian, irrespective of fishery value. The analysis of landing
shows that batoid fishery in the country is still driven by highly threatened species. The electric rays, skates, small guitar fishes
and stingrays with no fishery value are equally exploited as the bulk catch of these species with low turnover in fishery get
auctioned for high amounts by the small-scale factories producing fish manure and animal feed. Consequently, the fisherman
retains the non-commercial bycatch during trawling. The study draws attention towards reconsidering the fisheries regulation
and conservation acts in India.

Keywords: Elasmobranchs; Batoids; threatened species; commercial fishing; non-commercial species
SI Abstract Ref: 121




Irene Kingma
Dutch Elasmobranch Society

What have EU policy changes delivered for shark and ray conservation in Europe?
1.    Irene Kingma; Dutch Elasmobranch Society
2.    Paddy Walker; Dutch Elasmobranch Society

Two decades ago the situation for sharks and rays in European waters was pretty grim. There were no limits for fisheries on
elasmobranchs and endangered species did not have protection. Many species were in decline or had populations and
historically low levels.
A concerted effort by conservationist around Europe has led to a substantial increase in protective management measures
aimed at improving the status of sharks and rays in EU waters, but are we there yet? Have these changes in the policy
landscape yielded a significant result in the ocean?




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                          Page       5
We present an overview of EU internal laws and regulations that apply to elasmobranch management with a validation of the
level of change that has been achieved at a species level with an in depth analysis of several measures to pin point where the
key to effective conservation of elasmobranchs lies. We differentiate between management of skates and rays, which are
traditionally harvested commercially, and sharks which, with a few exceptions, tend to by bycatch species in EU fisheries.
We end with clear policy recommendations and follow up actions for legislators and, who knows, maybe even a song!


Keywords: policy; fisheries; Europe; North-East Atlantic; EU
SI Abstract Ref: 111




Fahmi
Research Centre for Oceanography BRIN – Indonesia

A review of target shark fisheries in the Lesser Sunda Islands: do they support the sustainable shark
fishing program in Indonesia?
1.    Fahmi; Research Centre for Oceanography BRIN – Indonesia
2.    Selvia Oktaviyani; Research Centre for Oceanography BRIN – Indonesia
3.    Wanwan Kurniawan; Research Centre for Oceanography BRIN – Indonesia
4.    Benaya Simeon; Sustainable Fisheries Management Scientific Forum of West Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia
1.    5, Soraya Gigentika; Sustainable Fisheries Management Scientific Forum of West Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia

The shark fishery in Tanjungluar Lombok is one of the largest target shark fisheries in Indonesia. Fishers from this location
mainly use surface longlines to catch pelagic sharks in the eastern Indian Ocean and adjacent waters. We used 20-year
landing data to identify a possible decline in shark production due to the fishery. A daily basis catch data collection has been
applied at Tanjungluar since 2014. This method provided more robust data and showed a stable catch pattern rather than using
the sampling-based method applied earlier. In general, the total catch of sharks caught by the surface longline fisheries varied
from around 300 individuals per month in the low season to more than 1000 individuals in the peak season. Two CITES-listed
species, Carcharhinus falciformis, and Sphyrna lewini were dominant in the shark catch composition within the last two
decades. The silky shark contributed around 20-60% of the total shark catch every month and showed an upward trend in the
catch from 2005 to 2021. Interestingly, the implementation of either CITES mechanisms for the species or the national shark
management program seemed to have no or less impact on this target fishery. We discussed some possible factors that may
sustain the shark fishery.

Keywords: the eastern Indian Ocean; pelagic shark; Carcharhinus falciformis
SI Abstract Ref: 116




Elisabeth Fahrni Mansur
Wildlife Conservation Society Bangladesh

CITES listings catalyze improved conservation prospects for sharks and rays in Bangladesh
1.    Elisabeth, Fahrni Mansur; Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) Bangladesh
2.    Nadim, Parves; Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) Bangladesh
3.    Mohammad, Shamsuddoha; Wildlife Conservation Society Bangladesh
4.    G M Masum, Billah; Wildlife Conservation Society Bangladesh
5.    Brian D., Smith; Wildlife Conservation Society Bangladesh

Unsustainable catches, driven in part by illegal trade, threaten 70% of the 52 shark and 85% of 71 ray species confirmed or
suspected to occur in Bangladesh. Reported landings of elasmobranchs from targeted and non-targeted small-scale and
industrial fisheries have declined by half from 6,234 tons over the past two decades, while official exports of dried shark fins
(combined with fish maw) spiked at over 2,000 tons between 2018-2020. There is growing concern about the harmful effects of
overfishing these apex predators on local livelihoods, food security, and the national economy.
CITES Appendix I and II listings of globally threatened sharks and rays have catalysed efforts to improve their conservation
management in Bangladesh. In 2021, the Bangladesh Wildlife Act was amended to strictly protect species assessed as
Critically Endangered or Endangered in the IUCN Red List and/or listed in CITES Appendix I, and to regulate possession and
trade of species assessed as Vulnerable and/or listed in CITES Appendix II. Non-Detriment Finding assessments for four
species/species groups, including 15 CITES Appendix II listed species, confirmed the need for improved interagency
collaboration, monitoring, and trade transparency. These NDFs also highlighted the need to reduce non-target catches and
domestic consumption and trade that will not necessarily be reduced through stricter regulations on international trade.
Improved prospects for conservation management of elasmobranchs initiated through collaborative research, policy
development, trainings, and educational outreach exemplify how CITES listings can catalyse institutional collaboration and
empower government and non-government stakeholders to implement evidence-based conservation plans.

Keywords: CITES; conservation planning; interagency collaborations; national policy development; inclusive communication
SI Abstract Ref: 86




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                          Page        6
Movements & Habitat Use 5


Lydia Green
1; Manta Watch New Zealand Charitable Trust, 2; Manta Trust

Overview of population demographics and habitat use of Mobula birostris in Aotearoa New Zealand.
1.    Lydia Green, Manta Watch New Zealand Charitable Trust
2.    Edy Setyawan, University of Auckland
3.    Mark Erdmann, Conservation International Aotearoa

Despite being fully protected in New Zealand waters since 2011, significant gaps remain in our knowledge of nearly all aspects
of the oceanic manta’s (Mobula birostris) life history and ecology in New Zealand. This lack of data has hindered
comprehensive conservation management planning for this globally threatened species; New Zealand’s Department of
Conservation currently lists the species as “Data Deficient” in terms of its threat classification. A focused effort to better
understand the New Zealand oceanic manta population over the past four years has resulted in a significant increase in
knowledge of this species’ population dynamics and habitat use. Combining citizen science and dedicated research efforts, 618
verified sightings spanning the time period of 1994 to 2022 have been collated from New Zealand waters, including 103 ventral
photographic IDs, comprising 71 females, 26 males and 6 individuals of unknown sex. Furthermore, preliminary findings from
intensive field work conducted in 2021-22 suggests that New Zealand supports a significant and healthy population of M.
birostris. Observations include extensive feeding aggregations of more than 50 individuals, sightings of heavily pregnant
females feeding alongside subadult males (disc widths of 590cm and 300cm respectively) and numerous accounts of active
courtship displays. Moreover, this population shows very low incidence of injuries (17 %). These initial findings support the
hypothesis that M. birostris are resident for at least part of the year in Aotearoa New Zealand and likely reproducing there and
suggest that this population may be critical in global conservation efforts to recover this endangered species.

Keywords: photo ID; endangered species; population dynamics; oceanic manta ray; New Zealand
SI Abstract Ref: 303




Gency L. Guirhem
1. AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Pasaia, Spain; 2. Institute of
Marine Fisheries and Oceanology, College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences, University of the Philippines
Visayas, Iloilo, Philippines.

Modelling the spatio-temporal distribution of devil rays in the western Indian ocean using observer data
from the EU tropical tuna purse seine fishery
1.  Gency L. Guirhem; AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Pasaia, Spain; Institute
    of Marine Fisheries and Oceanology, College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences, University of the Philippines Visayas,
    Iloilo, Philippines.
2. Haritz Arrizabalaga; AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Pasaia, Spain.
3. Leire Lopetegui-Eguren; AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Pasaia, Spain.
4. Hilario Murua; International Sustainable Seafood Foundation, Washington, DC, USA.
5. Nerea Lezama-Ochoa; Institute of Marine Sciences, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, USA; Mobula
    Conservation, La Paz, Mexico.
6. Shane P. Griffiths; Ecosystem and Bycatch Program, Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, La Jolla, CA, USA.
7. Jon Ruiz Gondra; AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Pasaia, Spain.
8. Philippe S. Sabarros; MARBEC, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Ifremer, IRD, Sète, France; Institut de Recherche pour le
    Développement, Ob7, Sète, France.
9. Jose Carlos Baez; Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro Oceanogra´fico de Ma´laga, Fuengirola, Spain; Instituto
    Iberoamericano de Desarrollo Sostenible (IIDS), Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Temuco, Chile.
10. Maria José Juan-Jordá; AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Pasaia, Spain

The European Union and Seychelles tropical tuna purse seine fishery in the western Indian ocean incidentally captures three
species of devil rays, the spinetail devil ray (Mobula mobular), the sicklefin devil ray (M. tarapacana), and the bentfin devil ray
(M. thurstoni), all currently classified globally as Endangered by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature. We
used observer data collected on tropical tuna purse seiners in 2010-2020 to analyse the relationship between the
presence/absence of devil rays in the catches and the environmental conditions, the spatial and temporal variability of fishing
locations, and fishing operational variables. We found that higher probability of capture was predicted in areas with relatively
high chlorophyll-a concentrations, high sea surface temperature fronts, and low sea surface height. This may indicate that the
presence of this planktivore species might be associated with mesoscale features resulting in elevated biomass of zooplankton.
We also found higher probability of catching devil rays in sets on free-swimming schools of tuna than in sets on fish
aggregating devices and smaller tuna catch sets. The spatial predictions identified two important areas (the Mascarene Plateau
and central Indian Ridge) persistent throughout the year with higher probabilities of catching a devil ray, and two seasonal
important areas (the western Arabian Sea and Equatorial Region) with higher catch probabilities during the winter monsoon
regime (December-March). Information on the spatio-temporal and environmental preference of devil rays is crucial to support
more holistic spatial management and conservation strategies to further reduce the bycatch of these species.

Keywords: devil rays; Mobula; spinetail devil ray; bycatch; species distribution models
SI Abstract Ref: 21




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page      7
Hannah Calich
University of Western Australia

Physiological biomarkers provide insights into tiger shark movement
1.    Hannah J. Calich; University of Western Australia
2.    Ana M.M. Sequeira; Australian National University
3.    Bianca S. Rangel; University of São Paulo
4.    Shannon G. Moorhead; University of Miami
5.    Abigail Tinari; University of Miami
6.    Carolyn Cray; University of Miami
7.    Duncan J. Irschick; University of Massachusetts Amherst
8.    Emily R. Nelson; University of Miami
9.    Robert H. Michener; Boston University
10.   James A. Sulikowski; Arizona State University
11.   Charitha Pattiaratchi; University of Western Australia
12.   Austin J. Gallagher; Beneath the Waves
13.   Neil Hammerschlag; University of Miami

Physiological processes influence the movement behavior of animals. Understanding relationships between physiology and
behaviour can lead to breakthroughs in species’ movement ecology but linking ephemeral physiological conditions with
movement patterns has been an ongoing challenge. This is especially the case for migratory, free-roaming species notorious
for displaying highly variable movement over large spatiotemporal scales. Physiological and biological variables, termed
“biomarkers”, can describe underlying physiological processes that influence movement, such as energy storage and utilization,
growth, and development. Here, we aimed to determine the relative influence of physiology on intra-specific movement patterns
of a highly migratory apex predator, the tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier). We accomplished this by analyzing 50 measured
biomarkers for nutritional and energetic condition, metabolism, morphology, reproduction, and health, in addition to seasonality,
on the dispersion and scale of tiger shark movement across multiple temporal periods (7 – 25 days). Overall, nutrition-related
biomarkers had the largest relative influence on movement, followed by metabolic hormones, energy substrates, and
morphology. Reproductive state, health, and season had negligible influence on the movement patterns observed across the
temporal periods considered. These results emphasize the importance of tiger sharks acquiring, storing, and mobilizing energy
to support their movements, providing important knowledge about their movement ecology. Our work presents a novel
approach for addressing the challenge of linking movement patterns of free-roaming species to their physiology and has wide
applicability for future studies investigating the drivers of individual variation in movement of highly mobile species.

Keywords: movement ecology; physiology; satellite tag; boosted regression trees; Atlantic Ocean
SI Abstract Ref: 177




Nakia Cullain
Dalhousie University; Marine Megafauna Foundation

Zavora Bay: A new critical area for reef manta rays within Africa’s largest identified population
1.    Michelle Carpenter; University of Cape Town
2.    Stephanie K. Venables; Marine Megafauna Foundation
3.    Andrea D. Marshall; Marine Megafauna Foundation
4.    Derek P. Tittensor; Dalhousie University
5.    Heike K. Lotze; Dalhousie University

Mozambique is a hotspot for threatened and data deficient species of sharks and rays, yet a lack of site-specific information
hinders the development of local and national species management plans. The largest identified population of reef manta rays
(Mobula alfredi) in Africa aggregate within a 350 km upwelling zone that extends from the Bazaruto Archipelago in the north, to
Zavora in the south. An 88% decline in sightings of M.alfredi along the Mozambican coastline represents one of the largest
declines on record. However, Zavora (a remote and less explored bay in the region), still has consistent and frequent sightings
of reef manta rays. Using sightings and photo-ID data from dive surveys conducted during 2009-2021, we investigate sightings
trends, habitat preference, and population demographics of M. alfredi in Zavora Bay. Our results indicate that compared to
other sites in Mozambique, abundance estimates for Zavora are still high, albeit on the decline. Our results also indicate a shift
from consistent year-round sightings to a seasonal aggregation from July-November, with complete abandonment of a
previously favoured cleaning station. The site and seasonal affinity of M. alfredi in Zavora Bay highlights the importance of
understanding fine-scale site use within the larger home range of this population to develop local management strategies. Our
findings provide evidence that Zavora Bay is a critical visitation site for reef manta rays in Mozambique and should be
considered a conservation priority area for this threatened species.

Keywords: threatened species; Mozambique; habitat preference; photo-ID; management
SI Abstract Ref: 174




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page      8
Benjamin Marsaly
School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware

Movement patterns of the sicklefin lemon shark, Negaprion acutidens, around Tahiti and Moorea, French
Polynesia, South Pacific.
1.    Benjamin, Marsaly; School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware, Lewes DE, USA.
2.    Pierpaolo, Brena; PSL Research University: EPHE-CNRS-UPVD USR 3278 CRIOBE, Perpignan, France.
3.    Eric, Clua; PSL Research University: EPHE-CNRS-UPVD USR 3278 CRIOBE, Perpignan, France.

The sicklefin lemon shark, Negaprion acutidens, is globally understudied compared to its sister species the Atlantic lemon
shark, N. brevirostris. Although it has been heavily targeted by artificial provisioning activities until 2017, its movements are still
unknown in the Society Islands, French Polynesia. Here, we used acoustic telemetry to study the residency and movement
patterns of the sicklefin lemon shark between June 2014 and July 2015. We deployed 21 receivers on the outer reefs of Tahiti
(n=11), Moorea (n=7), and Tetiaroa (n=3), an atoll located approximately 50 km north of Tahiti and Moorea. A total of 17
mature individuals were tagged internally by ingestion or externally using a speargun. Preliminary analyses indicate that sharks
were primarily detected around Moorea and at the Vallée Blanche, northeast of Tahiti, while no individuals were detected in
Tetiaroa. The number of detections is higher where shark-feeding occurred during the study period and decreases with the
distance from tagging location. Globally, the detections mostly occurred during the day, suggesting that adult sicklefin lemon
sharks use the outer reef during the day and move to deeper waters at night. Therefore, the sicklefin lemon shark seems to be
highly resident and could be impacted by artificial provisioning activities at a small spatial scale. Considering that artificial
provisioning is now forbidden in French Polynesia waters, such data is crucial to understand the long-term impacts of this
activity on sharks movements, and could pave the way for further studies focusing on dishabituation process regarding artificial
provisioning in shark species.

Keywords: spatial ecology; residency; acoustic telemetry
SI Abstract Ref: 171




                                                                      Sharks International 2022                            Page       9
Fisheries & Trade 4


Sweta Beura
Zoological Survey of India

Integrative taxonomy, species composition, distribution and current status of deep-sea chondrichthyans
of India
1.    Kinattumkara Bineesh; Zoological Survey of India
2.    Sweta Beura; Zoological Survey of India

India is one of the leading chondrichthyan fishing nations. Most of the deep-sea chondrichthyans species are poorly known due
to their low market value and low targeted sampling for research activities. In India, deep-sea chondrichthyans are caught both
as targeted and bycatch, there is a lack of data on deep-sea chondrichthyans, despite their high market demand and catch.
The objective of this study was to characterize the catch composition of deep-sea chondrichthyans, using extensive trawl catch
data of commercial deep-sea shrimp fishery. The present paper is an attempt to provide new information on catch, integrative
taxonomy, species composition current distribution, fleet size, trade and usage of deepsea chondrichthyans in India. This study
based on the landing site surveys conducted during the years 2017-2021 at major fish landing centres along the west and east
coast of India and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The present findings revealed 47 species under 19 families caught in
commercial and artisanal fisheries. Trawl surveys show that Cephaloscyllium silasi distribution restricted to off Kerala and
South Andaman Islands of India. Hexatrygon bickelli and Squalus hemipinnis were confirmed from Kerala and Andaman
Islands respectively. Highest diversity in the landings was observed at Kerala with several species recorded during the present
study was new to Indian waters. Fishery was dominated by species belonging to families Echinorhinidae, Centrophoridae, and
Rhinochimaeridae. Continued monitoring and collection of biological and taxonomical data from additional sources is
recommended for better management measures for sustainable utilization of deep-sea chondrichthyans from Indian waters.

Keywords: deep-sea Chondrichthyans; species composition; diversity; Indian EEZ; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 350




Alifa Bintha Haque
University of Oxford

Mitigating elasmobranch product trade: A market analysis for made-to-measure interventions
1.    Alifa Bintha Haque; Nature-based Solutions Initiative, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Zoology Research and
      Administration Building, 11a Mansfield Rd, Oxford OX1 3SZ, UK
2.    Rodrigo Oyanedel ; The Interdisciplinary Centre for Conservation Science, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford,
      Oxford, UK.
3.    Rachel D. Cavanagh; British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge, UK, CB3 0ET

The global trade in elasmobranch products contributes to dramatic declines in elasmobranch populations. Recognising realistic
and context-appropriate solutions to mitigate trade requires a thorough grasp of elasmobranch marketplaces that are
notoriously inadequate where products originate, predominantly in the global south. We assessed the market components of
the elasmobranch fin trade in the Bay of Bengal, Bangladesh, using a framework designed for wildlife markets utilising mixed-
method approaches. We found that markets are supply-driven and complex. Fins are supplied from protected and unprotected
species, targeted and by-caught, and traded with other fishery and elasmobranch products. We highlighted challenges due to
no reporting, limited monitoring and the difficulties in segregating species/products of different legal statuses. An unjust power
structure between low-access harvesters and high-access actors with finances, market information and social ties was evident.
The discriminative power exercising influenced unsustainable trade by high-access actors attaining excessive and unequal
benefits from the market and often impacting independent decision-making of low-access actors (e.g., adopting conservation
measures). We found ambiguous clarity about legality, growing distrust between fishers and fishery managers/policy-makers,
and confusion regarding the infrequent seizures resulting from limited awareness, acceptance and no collaborative approach
preceding law-making and enacting. These led to increased conflicts, corruption, non-compliance and unwillingness to report
catch. Actors’ behaviours are driven by diverse motivations, requiring a sophisticated regulation for reducing catch and trade,
with local and global benefits. We provided targeted management recommendations to mitigate unsustainable trade, e.g.,
sustainable catch quotas, better financial arrangements, improved access to incentives for low-access actors, and other market
solutions.

Keywords: Bay of Bengal; market-based solutions; wildlife market; wildlife trade; shark/ray
SI Abstract Ref: 59




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 10
Andhika Prima Prasetyo
Centre Fisheries Research, Ministry for Marine Affairs and Fisheries, Indonesia

Shark-dust: high-throughput DNA sequencing of processing residues unveils rife trade in endangered
sharks and rays
1.    Andhika, Prasetyo; School of Science, Engineering and Environment, University of Salford, Salford, UK / Centre Fisheries
      Research, Ministry for Marine Affairs and Fisheries, Indonesia
2.    Joanna, Murray; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Lowestoft, UK
3.    Firdaus, Agung; Directorate for Conservation and Marine Biodiversity, Ministry for Marine Affairs and Fisheries, Indonesia
4.    Efin, Muttaqin; Wildlife Conservation Society Indonesia Program, Indonesia
5.    Naiara, Sales; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Chester, UK
6.    Allan, McDevitt; School of Science, Engineering and Environment, University of Salford, Salford, UK
7.    Stefano, Mariani; School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK

Trade restrictions have been established to counteract the rapid global decline of sharks and rays. This has resulted from high
fishing pressure, by-catch and market demand for certain products (e.g. fins). Tackling the illegal trade of endangered species
poses enormous challenges for authorities, including taxonomic ambiguity, product variety, logistical issues for inspections and
trade flow complexity. Traditional genetic techniques have been developed, but these techniques are either time-consuming or
species-specific, and generally fail to provide a comprehensive picture of the biological complexity underlying trade patterns.
Here, we explore a powerful, alternative option, based on the high-throughput sequencing of trace DNA fragments retrieved
from dust and scraps left behind by trade activities. We collected 28 ‘shark-dust’ samples from seven processing plants across
Java, Indonesia, and generated shark and ray sequences through DNA metabarcoding. We also collected individual tissue
samples (175) in the same processing plants and identified the species by high-throughput barcoding (HTB) for comparison.
Over 74% of reads belonged to CITES-listed species i.e. hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna spp.), silky shark (Carcharhinus
falciformis), bigeye thresher shark (Alopias superciliosus) and the recently CITES-listed giant guitarfish (Glaucostegus typus). A
total of 75 shark and ray genera (representing half of the chondrichthyan orders) were identified, with 20 more taxa detected
using the dust samples than those identified using tissue samples. Furthermore, dust samples were shown to effectively
capture the species diversity being exploited. We argue that this ‘shark-dust’ approach is likely to become a powerful and cost-
effective monitoring tool wherever elasmobranchs are traded.

Keywords: trade monitoring; CITES; DNA metabarcoding; sharks and rays; Indonesia
SI Abstract Ref: 26




Pierluigi Carbonara
COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca

Mitigation trials in South Adriatic pelagic longline: first results from the MedBycatch project
1.    Pierluigi, Carbonara: COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca
2.    Giulia, Prato: WWF Italy
3.    Walter, Zupa: COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca
4.    Simone, Niedermüller: WWF Mediterranean
5.    Andrea, Bellodi: Cagliari University
6.    Maria Cristina, Follesa: Cagliari University

In the Mediterranean surface longlines (SL) the shark and ray bycatch represents around 10-15% in biomass of
the total catch and the highest bycatch was found in the Alboran and Adriatic Sea. The blueshark (Prionace
glauca), considered by IUCN as Critically Endangered in the Mediterranean, represent over 70% of the
chondricthyan catch. In this context in South Adriatic pelagic longline fishery were tested two type of bycatch
mitigation trials: circular hook and chancing fishing strategy.
About the circular hook in a SL were used alternatively two type of hooks: circular (C-type), normal type (J-type).
In 5 fishing days an experimental SL was used and the CPUE, bycatch-rate and %Bycatch was calculated for the
C-hook and J-hook. The results showed that there were no significant differences in terms of CPUE, bycatch-rate
and %bycatch between the two types of hooks. While the bluesharks caught by C-type hook showed a
significantly better condition than the J-type.
In the fishing strategy used by fisherman the SL fishing mostly during the night. During two consecutive fishing
trips (FT) with at least 3 fishing days each, in one FT was used the standard fishing strategy (strategy 1: SL
fishing mostly during the night) and in the other the reverse fishing strategy (strategy2: SL fishing mostly during
the day) was used. The CPUE, bycatch-rate and %bycatch for the two fishing strategy showed that in the
strategy 2 any blue shark was caught, while for the target species a significant reduction about the 30% was
observed.

Keywords: bycatch; Prionace glauca; circular hook; fishing strategy




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 11
Movements & Habitat Use 6


Marta Cambra
Escuela de Biología y Centro de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología de la Universidad de Costa Rica

Ecological drivers shaping elasmobranch assemblages at Cocos Island, a near-pristine ecosystem
1.    Marta Cambra; Escuela de Biología y Centro de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología de la Universidad de
      Costa Rica
2.    Isaac Chinchilla; Área de Conservación Marina Cocos del Sistema Nacional de Areas de Conservación de Costa Rica
3.    Geiner Golfín; Área de Conservación Marina Cocos del Sistema Nacional de Areas de Conservación de Costa Rica
4.    Mario Espinoza; Escuela de Biología y Centro de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología de la Universidad de
      Costa Rica

Cocos Island is known to have one of the largest biomass levels of predatory fish in the tropics, yet our knowledge of the
drivers affecting elasmobranch abundance and distribution patterns is limited. This study examined the effect of spatial,
seasonal, and environmental drivers on elasmobranch assemblages at Cocos Island using baited remote underwater video
stations (BRUVS) between 2016 and 2020. Elasmobranchs were detected in 95% of the BRUVS, with stations having on
average 2.7 ± 1.6 species and 6.3 ± 6.5 ind/hour largely overcoming the mean relative abundance reported by BRUVS in other
protected reef systems. A total of 13 species comprised the elasmobranch assemblage of Cocos Island, which was clearly
divided between pelagic and benthic environments. Depth and habitat were identified as the major factors structuring
elasmobranch assemblages in benthic environments, although substrate cover, distance to the coast and season were also
significant predictors. Significant indicator species with stronger species-habitat associations were the silky shark Carcharhinus
falciformis dominating pelagic habitats, the white tip reef shark Triaenodon obesus and the black tip reef shark Carcharhinus
melanopterus dominating warm shallow areas with coral or rocky reefs, the scalloped hammerhead shark Sphyrna lewini
associated with pinnacles at greater distances from the coast and the silvertip shark Carcharhinus albimarginatus with
preference for deeper sandy areas in bays and inshore sites. This study represents the first attempt at describing ecological
patterns of elasmobranch assemblages removing human presence from the water and using a systematic research survey in
benthic and pelagic environments of Cocos Island.

Keywords: Costa Rica; baited remote underwater video stations; multivariate regression trees; distance based redundancy
analysis; generalized additive mixed models
SI Abstract Ref: 151




Larissa Modica
Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO)

Elasmobranch diversity in the Aviles canyon system (NE Atlantic) and habitat modelling
1.    Larissa Modica: Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO C.O Santander)
2.    Cristina Rodríguez-Cabello: Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO C.O Santander)
3.    Francisco Sánchez; Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO C.O Santander)

Information on the distribution and habitat preferences of ecologically important species is essential for their management and
protection. The Avilés Canyon System (ACS) located in NE Atlantic Waters (Cantabrian Sea) was declared as Site of
Community Importance (SIC) within the Nature 2000 network based on Habitat Directive 92/43/CEE. Therefore several surveys
have been conducted to identify the presence of vulnerable habitats and species and to achieve a better understanding of the
ecosystem function.
Biomass data were gathered from two otter trawls datasets (2010 and 2011) within two different projects: LIFE+INDEMARES
and ERDEM. Data were over dispersed due to the species typical spatial preferences, (a lot of zeros together with some very
high values samples), thus zero-inflated GAM (Generalized Additive Models) with a negative binomial distribution were applied
to predict species biomasses in the study area for the four most abundant chondricthyans: Scyliorhinus canicula, Raja clavata,
Galeus melastomus, Chimaera monstrosa. A broad set of environmental variables were available to link with biomasses, but
after a linear regression with a Pearson correlation test to avoid overestimation of explained variance just six environmental
layers were used: depth, BPI broad, Q50 phi, S0, organic matter content (OM) of the sediments and the categorical variable
bottom type.
The variable that better explains their distribution is depth. The variances explained varied between 72.9% for G. melastomus
and 82.6% for S. canicula. All the species studied showed a clear bathymetric distributional pattern probably linked more to
feeding behavior and prey availability than to specific environmental conditions.


Keywords: elasmobranch diversity; Aviles Canyon System; habitat; distribution models; NE Atlantic
SI Abstract Ref: 123




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 12
Johann MOURIER
Université de Corse Pasquale Paoli, UMS 3514 Plateforme Marine Stella Mare

Dive into the social life of elasmobranchs: Investigating social and collective behaviour in sharks and
rays

Social and collective behaviours as well as group formation are found across the animal kingdom including sharks and rays.
Animal aggregations may result from a common requirement for shared resources or favourable environmental conditions and
are not necessarily driven by social attraction between individuals. In contrast, social groups rely on active social preferences
between individuals. Although they have been considered mostly solitary organisms, improvements in analytical tools and the
technology used to study behaviours in the wild has led to the confirmation that many elasmobranch species were more social
than previously thought and to a better understanding of the form, structure, function and ecological significance of associations
and grouping in sharks and rays. Here, I present some case studies I have been conducting or involved in, illustrating research
on aggregations, social and collective behaviour in wild elasmobranchs. This includes species with gregarious or solitary life
styles. This overview aims at presenting the latest advancements in analytical techniques (especially social network analysis)
and field technology (e.g. photo-identification, acoustic telemetry, biologging, video recording or drone) used to study
elasmobranch aggregating patterns and social systems, and discussing the benefits and costs of grouping and socializing in
these taxa.

Keywords: social behaviour; collective behaviour; social networks; biologging; aggregations
SI Abstract Ref: 118



Ben D'Antonio
Ocean Graduate School and the UWA Oceans Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia;
Australian Institute of Marine Science, Indian Ocean Marine Research Centre, Perth, WA, Australia

Drivers of fine-scale vertical and horizontal movement of whale sharks at Ningaloo Reef, Western
Australia
1.  Ben, D'Antonio; Ocean Graduate School and the UWA Oceans Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA,
    Australia & Institution & Australian Institute of Marine Science, Indian Ocean Marine Research Centre, Perth, WA,
    Australia
2. Luciana C Ferreira; Australian Institute of Marine Science, Indian Ocean Marine Research Centre, Perth, WA, Australia
3. Mark Meekan; Australian Institute of Marine Science, Indian Ocean Marine Research Centre, Perth, WA, Australia
4. Lilian Lieber; Queen's University Marine Laboratory, Portaferry, Northern Ireland
5. Paul G. Thomson; Ocean Graduate School and the UWA Oceans Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA,
    Australia
6. Chari Pattiaratchi; Ocean Graduate School and the UWA Oceans Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA,
    Australia
7. Patti Virtue; Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia
8. Andrew Brierley; Gatty Marine Laboratory, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, Fife KY16 8LB, Scotland, UK
9. Chloe M Power; Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia
10. Ana M. M. Sequeira; School of Biology and ANU Collage of Science, The Australian National University, Canberra,
    Australia
11. Michele Thums; Australian Institute of Marine Science, Indian Ocean Marine Research Centre, Perth, WA, Australia

Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) are thought to seasonally aggregate in coastal waters to take advantage of foraging
opportunities provided by enhanced localised productivity. To test this hypothesis, we examined the links between the
movements of whale sharks and prey availability at Ningaloo Reef, Western Australia. In 2018, we sampled the water column
using fisheries echosounder (Simrad EK60) transects and dedicated target trawls via ship-based surveys to describe the
distribution, abundance and density of zooplankton prey in the vicinity of concurrently tracked whale sharks (using Fastloc-GPS
tags). Using generalised additive mixed models, we examined whale shark kernel utilisation density (horizontal movement) and
time-at-depth (calculated per 5 m depth bins) and (response variables) in relation to various prey measurements (n per m^3).
There was a positive relationship between whale shark horizontal movement and prey density. Sharks tended to move along
the 40-60 m depth contours, which were characterised by pronounced bathymetric features accumulating higher densities of
prey near the seabed. However, despite shark horizontal movements centred within areas of high prey density, there was no
relationship between shark time-at-depth and prey density. Sharks displayed consistent patterns of repeated descents and
ascents through the water column with individuals spending ~49% of time within the upper 5 m of the water column,
irrespective of vertical prey distribution. We suggest these vertical movements may reflect the difficulty of feeding on prey in the
lower water column compared to filter feeding near the sea surface.

Keywords: foraging ecology; movement ecology; hydroacoustics; whale sharks; marine megafauna
SI Abstract Ref: 107




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 13
Rebecca Lipscombe
Southern Cross University

Habitat use and movement patterns of tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) in eastern Australian waters
1.    Rebecca Lipscombe; Southern Cross University
2.    Julia Spaet; University of Cambridge
3.    Anna Scott; Southern Cross University
4.    Chi Hin Lam; University of Massachusetts
5.    Craig Brand; New South Wales Department of Primary Industries
6.    Paul Butcher; New South Wales Department of Primary Industries/Southern Cross University

Understanding the movement of highly mobile marine predators is vital for effective conservation and management. Despite
being targeted in shark control programs, our knowledge of tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) movement and habitat use off
eastern Australia is limited. To investigate the habitat use and movements in this region, 16 sharks (157–384 cm total length)
were tagged with MiniPAT pop-up satellite archival tags in 2018 and 2019. Eleven of these individuals were also fitted with
satellite-linked radio transmitting tags. After release, most sharks moved off the continental shelf and travelled north,
associating with seamounts as they moved toward Queensland. While at liberty, they transited through temperate, sub-tropical
and tropical waters, spending the majority of time in the upper 50 m of the water column and at temperatures between 22–25
˚C. Horizontal movement was focused in offshore waters beyond the continental slope. Increased movement over shelf waters
occurred mainly during the austral spring and summer when the East Australian Current encroaches on the continental shelf.
Broad latitudinal movement along the east coast of Australia was evident and highlights the connectivity between tropical and
warm temperate regions.

Keywords: archival tag; Carcharhinid; satellite tag; shark management; geolocation
SI Abstract Ref: 105




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                        Page 14
Biology & Life History 2


Wade VanderWright
Simon Fraser University

Metabolic morphology and ecological lifestyle in sharks
1.    Wade, VanderWright; Simon Fraser University
2.    Jennifer, Bigman; NOAA
3.    Anthony, Iliou; Simon Fraser University
4.    Nick, Dulvy; Simon Fraser University

Metabolism underpins life histories, population dynamics, and extinction risk. Morphological traits that are linked to an
organism's metabolism may provide a first approximation to the ecological needs to support growth, survival, and reproduction.
Here we examine the relationship between respiratory physiology (i.e. gill slit height in proportion to total length) and activity
level (caudal fin aspect ratio) in nearly all extant shark species (n=456). Gill slit heights and caudal fin aspect ratios were
collected and measured from the field guide Sharks of the World (Ebert 2013). We used a Bayesian-phylogenetic inference
model that accounts for each species’ maximum size, primary habitat type, and evolutionary history. We found a strong positive
relationship between gill slit height and activity level. We also show that primary habitat had a strong effect on this relationship
with pelagic sharks exhibiting the highest gill slit heights and activity levels while deep water sharks showed the opposite trend.
These findings suggest that proxies for metabolic demand may be available via external and easy to measure morphological
traits and natural history. Insight into the metabolic demand of these animals may allow us to estimate vital life history traits that
could inform ecological risk assessments.

Keywords: metabolic theory of ecology; gill-oxygen limitation theory; macroecology; shrinking fishes
SI Abstract Ref: 2




Katherin Soto-López
Escuela de Sistemas Biológicos e Innovación Tecnológica, Universidad Autónoma Benito Juárez de Oaxaca
(ESBIT-UABJO), Oaxaca de Juárez, México; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias
Marinas, La Paz, Baja California Sur, Méx

Morphometry and histology to assess the maturity stage of three endangered devil ray species
(Elasmobranchii: Mobulidae) from the Gulf of California
1.    Katherin, Soto-López; Escuela de Sistemas Biológicos e Innovación Tecnológica, Universidad Autónoma Benito Juárez
      de Oaxaca (ESBIT-UABJO), Oaxaca de Juárez, México; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de
      Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Baja California Sur, México.
2.    Rosa Isabel, Ochoa-Báez; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Baja
      California Sur, México.
3.    Felipe, Galván-Magaña; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Baja
      California Sur, México.
4.    Javier Noé, Serrano-López; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Baja
      California Sur, México.
5.    John, O'Sullivan; Monterey Bay Aquarium, Monterey, California

Devil rays of the genus Mobula are subject to fishing exploitation worldwide, the population's reductions are evidenced by a
decline in the number of catches of these rays, for this reason, they are considered vulnerable to overexploitation. Limited
biological knowledge on these species has forced the use of precautionary conservation measures in some countries where
intensive fishing occurs. There is few information about the reproductive biology of these species. This study aimed to describe
the reproductive activity of three endangered species of the genus Mobula (Mobula munkiana, Mobula thurstoni, and Mobula
mobular) in the Gulf of California. Reproductive organs were collected during 7 years of commercial fishing (2001–2007), and
data on population structure, sex ratio, gamete production, and the number of offspring per breeding period were obtained.
Maturity stages were determined through histological analysis of the gonads for both sexes, and the size at maturity was
estimated based on anatomical and histological characteristics of the specimens caught. According to the results, there is an
urgent need to apply strict conservation measures, such as fishery closures during the breeding season (May to September) or
the establishment of catch sizes after specimens have reached sexual maturity, mainly in the countries where these rays are
caught.

Keywords: Mobula mobular; Mobula munkiana; Mobula thurstoni; reproduction; Gulf of California
SI Abstract Ref: 51




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 15
Mark Royer
Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology

The Right Stuff: Scalloped hammerhead sharks are metabolically poised for intensive and potentially
anoxic deep dives
1.    Mark, Royer; Hawaiʻi Institute of Marine Biology
2.    Danielle, Garcia; University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa
3.    Kevin, Weng; Virginia Institute of Marine Science
4.    Carl, Meyer; Hawaiʻi Institute of Marine Biology
5.    Kim, Holland; Hawaiʻi Institute of Marine Biology
6.    Jeff, Drazen; University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa

Scalloped hammerhead sharks (Sphryna lewini) routinely perform rapid deep dives to forage on meso and bathypelagic prey.
These deep dives consist of intensive burst swimming followed by resting periods in the surface mixed layer. Swimming muscle
temperature profiles suggest S. lewini suppress their gill function as a means to reduce convective heat loss. Such intensive
swimming behavior coupled with supposedly reduced respiration raises questions concerning the aerobic and anaerobic
metabolic capacity of their white swimming muscle. Measuring the activity rates of key enzymes used in aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism provides an indirect indicator of the metabolic potential of a tissue. Here we measured the maximal activities of
aerobic enzymes citrate synthase (CS), malate dehydrogenase (MDH) and anaerobic enzymes pyruvate kinase (PK) and
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) from white swimming muscle of S. lewini and were compared to those measured from other
coastal, deep-dwelling, and highly active endothermic shark species. Sphyrna lewini had significantly higher activity levels of
LDH, an anaerobic enzyme, and MDH, an aerobic enzyme. Results indicate the white muscle tissue of S. lewini is highly
anaerobic dependent for burst swimming but has a high potential for lactate buildup. High activity rates of MDH indicate the
potential for lactate to be rapidly reduced under aerobic conditions such as those experienced in the surface mixed layer
between dives. These physiological adaptations likely enable S. lewini to remain highly active while suppressing gill function
during deep dives and thereby exploit a very different ecological niche from sympatric shark species.

Keywords: scalloped hammerhead; deep diving; enzyme; lactate; metabolic poise
SI Abstract Ref: 52



Aaron Judah
Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

Functional integrity and vulnerability of shark and ray communities across the world’s coral reefs
1.    Aaron, Judah; Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
2.    Matthew, McLean; Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
3.    Christopher, Mull; Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
4.    Ana, Barbosa Martins; Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
5.    M. Aaron, MacNeil; Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada; Ocean Frontier Institute,
      Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

Sharks and rays support many ecological roles in coastal marine ecosystems, however widespread overfishing and habitat loss
have resulted in population declines. Despite the intrinsic vulnerability of shark and ray populations due to their life-history
characteristics, such as slow growth, low fecundity and late reproductive maturity, shark and ray functional community structure
from a trait-based approach has rarely been quantified. Here, we provide a global assessment of shark and ray functional
community structure among 230 tropical coral reefs in 42 nations across three ocean basins. We find that socio-economic
conditions mediate shark and ray functional diversity, functional originality (the uniqueness of the community based on their
traits) and functional dispersion (the overall breadth of trait combinations). Higher human gravity is strongly associated with
degradation of all functional biodiversity metrics, while the trait structure of highly populated areas favour benthic and
invertivorous sharks and rays. Large-bodied, pelagic and benthopelagic, deep diving, piscivorous and higher order carnivorous
species are less abundant under increased human impacts. Biogeographically, Atlantic assemblages are more functionally
original and diverse than Pacific assemblages, which are more represented by traits indicative of reef sharks rather than rays,
such as fusiform body shape, ram ventilation and pelagic or benthopelagic lifestyles. Closed marine protected areas support
substantially higher functional biodiversity than restricted and openly fished areas. Our findings illustrate the large-scale
functional degradation of shark communities on coral reefs but identify spatial management tools as powerful avenues for
protecting shark and ray functional integrity.

Keywords: coral reefs; functional traits; functional diversity; bruvs; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 102




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                      Page 16
Boryshpolets Serhii
Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice, South
Bohemian Research Center of Aquaculture and Biodiversity of Hydrocenoses, Zátiší 728/II, Vodňany 389 25,
Czech Republic.

The role of viscosity in the sperm motility of elasmobranch species.
1.    Serhii Boryshpolets; Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice.
2.    Borys Dzyuba; Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice
3.    Pablo García-Salinas; Grupo de Acuicultura y Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat
      Politècnica de València
4.    Victor Gallego; Grupo de Acuicultura y Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica de
      València
5.    Anatolii Sotnikov; Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice
6.    Juan F. Asturiano; Grupo de Acuicultura y Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica
      de València

Elasmobranchii belongs to an old evolutionary class of vertebrates that diverged 450 mya. These species present a wide
diversity of reproductive strategies while preserving the ancient mode of internal fertilization. Moreover, many of them are
considered endangered and may be extinct soon. Understanding the principles of sperm motility and sperm physiology is
essential to developing assisted reproductive techniques for this species group. Additionally, it is also important from
evolutionary and general physiological perspectives as a part of reproduction studies.
Elasmobranchii species possess relatively big spermatozoa (compared to bony fishes), with an elongated spiral shape head
and tail similar to one currently existing (but later diverged) in birds, reptiles, and amphibians, which can be considered an
evolutionary ancient. These particular structures may be associated with the necessity to penetrate viscous ovarian fluid or the
jelly layer of eggs, suggesting environmental viscosity as the driving force which shapes big-sized spermatozoa head to the
spiral shape during evolution.
In the present study, we observed spermatozoa motion by regular and high-speed video microscopy to visualize sperm and
flagellar motion in three different Elasmobranchii species: the freshwater ray Potamotrygon motoro, the marine skate Raja
asterias and the shark Scyliorhinus canicula. We investigated the effect of surrounding media viscosity on spermatozoa motility
parameters and their ability to propagate, release from spermatozeugmata, and perform directional changes. Our results
suggest that the surrounding media's viscosity regulates spermatozoa motility and may affect its performance during
fertilization in the Elasmobranchii species.

Keywords: cartilaginous fishes; fish reproduction; spermatozeugmata
SI Abstract Ref: 186




Atlantine Boggio-Pasqua
Aix-Marseille University

Whitespotted eagle ray (Aetobatus narinari) age and growth in wild (in situ) versus aquarium-housed (ex
situ) individuals: implications for conservation and management
1. Atlantine, Boggio-Pasqua; Aix-Marseille University, France.
2. Kim, Bassos-Hull; Sharks and Rays Conservation Research Program, Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, FL, USA.
3. William H., Aeberhard; Swiss Data Science Center, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.
4. Lisa A., Hoopes; Research and Conservation Department, Georgia Aquarium, Atlanta, GA, USA.
5. Denise A., Swider; Discovery Cove, Orlando, FL, USA.
6. Krystan A., Wilkinson; Sharks and Rays Conservation Research Program, Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, FL, USA.
7. Manuel, Dureuil; Shark and Ray Conservation Centre, Dartmouth, Canada.

The whitespotted eagle ray (Aetobatus narinari), a large pelagic migratory ray with an endangered status on the IUCN red list,
displays slow growth and late maturity life history characteristics based on available literature. Historically, its age and growth
parameters have been reported through vertebral aging methods. However, the periodicity of vertebrate band pair formation,
which is used for aging, has not been validated for this species, making aging accuracy and thus the resulting growth
parameters uncertain. In this study, we used both a frequentist and Bayesian method of estimating sex-specific von Bertalanffy
growth parameters (DW_∞, k) in wild recaptured versus aquarium-housed rays. Additionally, we estimated growth from
repeated measurement data collected from aquarium-housed rays, to obtain growth parameters while allowing for individual
variability. Between 2009 and 2020, 590 whitespotted eagle rays were caught, measured, tagged and released along the
southwest coast of Florida. Thirty-four were recaptured between 5–1413 days at liberty. Nineteen additional rays were
collected, transported and maintained at Georgia Aquarium, Atlanta, with regular size and weight monitoring. Wild whitespotted
eagle rays were found to grow faster and mature earlier than previously thought, with Bayesian estimates of k = 0.28 year-1 in
females, and k = 0.30 year-1 in males. Aquarium-housed individuals seemed to grow slower and reach smaller sizes, although
data provided by the aquariums showed variable growth patterns depending on the facility. Life history parameters and growth
trajectories generated from this study offer valuable information to aid with future conservation management strategies of this
endangered species.

Keywords: eagle ray; life history; age and growth analysis; maturity; longevity
SI Abstract Ref: 227




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 17
Threats Beyond Overfishing 1


Florencia Cerutti
Charles Darwin Foundation

Vulnerability of chondrichthyan fishes of the Eastern Tropical Pacific to climate change
Cerutti-Pereyra, F.Denkerd, L., Espinoza, M., Fallo-Mejía, P., Finucci, B., Galván-Magaña, F., Hacohen, A., Hearn, A., Hoyos-
Padilla, M., Ketchum, J., Moya, A., Navia, A., Pazmiño, D., Ramírez-Macías, D., Rummer, J., Salinas-de-León, P., Sosa-
Nishizaki, O., Stock, C., Chin, A.

Climate change is an environmental emergency threatening species and ecosystems globally and leading to a critical need to
understand how marine species will be affected. Vulnerability assessments provide a framework to assess climate impacts
combining species’ exposure to a stressor, their sensitivity, and their capacity to adapt. We used an Integrated Risk
Assessment to evaluate the vulnerability of 132 chondrichthyan species in the Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP) to climate change
and identified eight climate change factors most relevant for the region. The overall vulnerability for 23% of ETP
chondrichthyans is High and 76% are Moderately vulnerable to climate change. Most of the Highly vulnerable species are
batoids (77%), and most (90%) are coastal species or linked to coastal ecosystems through nurseries. Ocean warming, in
combination with hypoxia and acidification, will have the most widespread effect on ETP chondrichthyans, but coastal species
and those with reliance on coastal habitats will also contend with changes sea level rise and salinity from freshwater inputs.
Vulnerability increases with synergies with other anthropogenic factors already occurring in the region, thus mitigating the
impacts of climate change on ETP chondrichthyans include addressing issues with overfishing and habitat destruction too.
Specific actions may be required for species at higher risk including protecting coastal bays and estuarine habitats, addressing
fisheries sustainability, and reducing mortality. This assessment also identified knowledge gaps concerning ETP
chondrichthyans and highlights the need of further understand the impacts of climate change on ETP habitats and processes.

Keywords: risk assessment; climate change; sharks; batoids; chimeras
SI Abstract Ref: 90




Franco Cristiani
Universidad Nacional del Comahue, Bariloche, Rio Negro, Argentina; CESIMAR, CENPAT-CONICET, Puerto
Madryn, Chubut, Argentina

Immune and endocrine reproductive parameters of the chimaera, Callorhinchus callorhynchus,
inhabiting a human-impacted area in Patagonia, Argentina. Preliminary results.
1.    Franco, Cristiani; Universidad Nacional del Comahue, Bariloche, Rio Negro, Argentina; CESIMAR, CENPAT-CONICET,
      Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina.
2.    Cynthia A., Awruch; CESIMAR, CENPAT-CONICET, Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina; School of Natural Sciences,
      University of Tasmania, Tasmania, Australia.
3.    Gabriela M., Palacios; CESIMAR, CENPAT-CONICET, Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina.

In an increasingly stressed marine environment due to anthropic activities, the assessment of wildlife health becomes
imperative. Marine organisms are exposed to a complex mix of pollutants which can compromise their wellbeing. Due to the
life-history characteristics, use of habitats and distribution, Chondrichthyans are prone to bioaccumulate and biomagnify
significant amounts of pollutants. Knowledge of immune and reproductive impairments on wild individuals can serve as an early
alert of potential conservation threats. In this study we present preliminary results on immune and reproductive parameters of
the elephant fish, Callorhinchus callorhynchus, inhabiting an anthropic impacted area. Elephant fish were captured by rod and
reel from shore between October 2021 and April 2022, in the Golfo Nuevo, Chubut, Argentina. Hematological parameters and
reproductive hormonal profiles are presented, constituting the first report for this species. Erythrocytes, thrombocytes and five
types of leucocytes (lymphocytes, monocytes, heterophils, eosinophils and neutrophils) were characterized by light microscopy.
Progesterone, estradiol and testosterone were measured in juveniles and adults of both sexes. This study provides baseline
physiological information for the species, contributing to an ongoing research on the responses of the immune and reproductive
systems within an ecotoxicological context.

Keywords: physiology; ecotoxicology; chimaera; immunology; reproduction
SI Abstract Ref: 99




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 18
Maria Auxiliadora Sabando Plaza
University of Delaware

Metal heads: Physiological and neurological effects of methylmercury on a small coastal elasmobranch,
Mustelus canis
1.    Maria Auxiliadora Sabando Plaza; University of Delaware
2.    Dr. Mi-Ling Li; University of Delaware
3.    Dr. Jon Cohen; University of Delaware
4.    Dr. Aaron Carlisle; University of Delaware

As mid to upper trophic level predators, elasmobranchs are well known to have elevated levels of mercury and its more toxic,
organic form methylmercury (MeHg). The lethality of methyl mercury across different taxa has been well researched, and its
sub lethal effects have only been investigated in depth at the scope of human health with no focus on fish that have the highest
mercury burden. However, the sub lethal effects of exposure to MeHg, which are known to impact animal behavior, cognitive
ability, and physiology, remains largely undescribed. In this study, we establish baseline information on how the physiology of a
small, coastal, demersal, elasmobranch species (Mustelis canis, smooth dogfish) is impacted by prolonged, sub lethal
exposure of this widespread and potent contaminant. We assess sublethal effects of different levels of exposure using different
physiological parameters including aerobic scope measured via oxygen consumption, growth rate, body condition, and food
consumption. As a secondary objective we will use a novel approach where we assess cognitive impacts by measuring
learning ability and memory through operant conditioning. Behaviors, such as foraging, prey capture, swimming behavior,
memory, and learning are critical for many species of elasmobranchs yet are likely impacted by exposure to MeHg. Hence,
assessing effects on physiology and behavior after sub-lethal exposure can give us an idea of how important physiological and
cognitive processes may respond to changing ocean contaminant conditions.

Keywords: methlymercury; physiology; cognition; sublethal effects
SI Abstract Ref: 141




Dr Vincent Raoult
School of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia; School of Natural
Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia

Reliance of young sharks on threatened estuarine habitats for nutrition implies susceptibility to climate
change
1.    Yuri, Niella; School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia
2.    Vincent, Raoult; School of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle, NSW Australia
3.    Troy, Gaston; School of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle, NSW Australia
4.    Kyle, Goodman; School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia
5.    Rob, Harcourt; School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia
6.    Vic, Peddemors; NSW Department of Primary Industries, Sydney Institute of Marine Science, Mosman, Sydney, New
      South Wales, Australia
7.    Amy, Smoothey; NSW Department of Primary Industries, Sydney Institute of Marine Science, Mosman, Sydney, New
      South Wales, Australia

Climate change and urbanization of coastal areas are impacting estuarine habitats globally. While these regions are important
for the early-life development of many aquatic species, links between habitat use and foraging ecology are not well known.
Thus, it is essential to understand the importance of threatened habitats for animals inhabiting estuaries to promote their
conservation and improve ecosystem management. This study examined the importance of estuarine habitats as feeding
grounds for juvenile bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas) in the Clarence River, a nursery area where the species is targeted by
commercial fisheries in New South Wales, Australia. Juvenile sharks (n = 54) ranging from one to ∼6.5 years-old, together with
particulate matter and several primary producer species of mangrove and saltmarsh, were sampled for δ13C, δ15N and δ34S
stable isotopes. Bayesian mixing models and a Generalized Additive Mixed Model were used to investigate the contribution of
estuarine habitats to the diet of bull sharks and changes with growth. The importance of resources consumed from within
mangrove habitats for juvenile bull shark resource use was minimal but slightly increased with age, with younger sharks (<2.5
years) relying on prey feeding on sources derived from particulate organic matter, while older juveniles (4–6.5 years) preyed on
species that relied mostly on threatened saltmarsh habitats. Our findings highlight the important linkages between habitats of
conservation concern and species redistribution in response to climate change, particularly as the animals could be moving
towards new areas lacking suitable estuarine habitats.

Keywords: bull sharks; stable isotopes; trophic ecology; shark nursery; stable isotopes
SI Abstract Ref: 183




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                        Page 19
Biology & Life History 3


Flávia F. Petean
Instituto Tecnológico de Chascomús, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Universidad
Nacional de San Martín, Av. Intendente Marino Km. 8,2 (B7130IWA), Chascomús, Buenos Aires, Argentina

Natural history of the Brazilian marine stingray Hypanus berthalutzae Petean, Naylor & Lima (2020):
knowledge and gaps
1.    Leonardo O. S. Espinosa; Instituto de Oceanografia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande, Campus Carreiros, Av. Itália
      Km. 08, 96203-900, Rio Grande, RS, Brasil
2.    Flávia F. Petean; Instituto Tecnológico de Chascomús, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas,
      Universidad Nacional de San Martín, Av. Intendente Marino Km. 8,2 (B7130IWA), Chascomús, Buenos Aires, Argentina

The coastal marine stingray species Hypanus berthalutzae is endemic to Brazil and occurs south of the Amazon river mouth to
São Paulo state, besides some oceanic islands and reefs. Until its description, H. berthalutzae specimens were identified as H.
americanus and due to its recent recognition, few studies on the natural history of H. berthalutzae have been published using
its current name. However, many previous studies were done with H. americanus: specimens now recognized as H.
berthalutzae. To identify the existing knowledge on the natural history of this stingray, we surveyed online databases for studies
accomplished with Brazilian specimens using a combination of keywords related to its location and species. A total of 123
searches returned 93 documents with information on H. berthalutzae. These were divided into 15 categories according to their
research area, and the commonest ones were Ecology (33%) and Fisheries (24%). Overall, studies report larger females than
males (TL/DW >75 vs. >51) and in a higher sex ratio (female:male, 21.3:1), with nursery areas in Rio Grande do Norte and
Fernando de Noronha. Besides, H. berthalutzae represents approximately 5% of captured batoids in Southeastern Brazil when
sequencing the mitochondrial maker COI, and occurs in depths varying from 0 to 77.5 m. However, we noticed a lack of studies
concerning Reproduction, Physiology, and Evolution of this stingray, areas that should be the focus of future studies since it is
already a Vulnerable species under the IUCN Red List assessment and is currently suffering from a high artisanal fishing
pressure.

Keywords: Lutz’s stingray; ecology; fisheries; evolution; vulnerable
SI Abstract Ref: 238




Janis Argeswara
Marine Megafauna Foundation

Sizing up the Nusa Penida MPA manta rays
1.    Janis, Argeswara; Marine Megafauna Foundation
2.    Maulana M, Priadhi; Marine Megafauna Foundation
3.    Aulia, Zeintrinanda; Marine Megafauna Foundation
4.    Elitza, Germanov; Marine Megafauna Foundation; Centre for Sustainable Aquatic Ecosystems, Harry Butler Institute,
      Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia ; Environmental and Conservation Sciences, Murdoch University,
      Perth, Western Australia, Australia

Manta rays have some of the lowest productivity rates of elasmobranchs and are threatened with extinction. Knowledge gaps in
birth and growth rates, and habitats used by young persist. A previous study identified critical habitats for Mobula alfredi in the
Nusa Penida Marine Protected Area, Indonesia. However, vital demographic data are outstanding, including manta ray sizes
and the maturity status of 47% of females, which lacked visual maturity indicators in the previous study. Here we measured
manta rays using laser and stereophotogrammetry to classify individuals into age groups. We measured 135 individuals, of
which 65.9% were females and 32.6% were males. More than half (52.8%) lacked visual maturity indicators for females, while
males were primarily adults. The average measurement for females was 4.18m (SE土0.06), and; 3.55m (SE土0.05) for males.
Based on the size of maturity assessed elsewhere, 3.2 m for females and 2.7m for males, 98.6% of females and 100% of
males we measured were deemed mature. Manta rays that were classified as mature based on visual observations averaged
4.27m (SE土0.05) for females and 3.55m (SE土0.06) for males. Nusa Penida’s manta rays are more similar in size to those
reported in Mozambique, and Japan, and larger than those in Raja Ampat, Indonesia, Hawaii, and the Maldives. Going forward
we will measure more juvenile individuals and aim to measure them repeatedly using stereophotogrammetry to allow growth-
rate calculations and assist in testing nursery criteria by identifying Young-of-the-Years.

Keywords: manta rays; stereophotogrammetry; laser-photogrammetry; Indonesia; growth rates
SI Abstract Ref: 289




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 20
Francisco Emanuel Polanco Vásquez
1; Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas; 2; Wildlife Conservation Society.

Reproductive biology of the longtail stingray Hypanus longus (Garman, 1880) caught in the Pacifico of
Guatemala.
1.    Francisco, Polanco-Vásquez; Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas; Wildlife
      Conservation Society.
2.    Rosa, Ochoa-Báez; Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas.
3.    Felipe, Galván-Magaña; Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas.
4.    Katherin, Soto-López; Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas.
5.    Jose, Moreira-Ramírez; Wildlife Conservation Society.

The longtail stingray Hypanus longus, is distributed from México to Ecuador. At present, it is the most commercially important
ray in south of Mexico and Central America. The goal is to know the reproductive biology of this ray species in order to gather
biological information for application into fisheries management plans. The morphometric data from 2659 organisms (1248
females, 1411 males) were obtained from January 2019 to February 2021. The females had an average size of 83.32 ± 22.34
cm disc width (DW) (41-178 cm DW); while in males the average size was 78.18 ± 10.46 cm DW (47-109 cm DW). There were
no significant differences between the sizes of females and males (Mann-Whitney p=0.2768). The sexual ratio was 0.88H:1M
(χ2=13.12; p<0.05), males were the most numerous group. In terms of reproductive parameters, 495 organisms (219 females
and 276 males) were analyzed. The L50 was 105.42 cm DW for females and 75.73 cm DW for males. Both values are lower
than the sizes previously reported for this species. Also using histology we found that mature males had fully developed sperm;
whilst mature females developed uterine milk-secreting crypts in the trophonemata. The fecundity of females was 1 to 6
embryos. The sexual ratio of the embryos was 0.76H:1M, (χ2=0.83; p>0.05). This species have an asynchronous reproductive
system. This is the first study about the reproductive biology on this species in Southern Mexico and the Central American
Pacific.

Keywords: reproduction; Guatemala Pacific; rays; artisanal fisheries
SI Abstract Ref: 290




Laurent Duchatelet
UCLouvain, Marine Biology Laboratory

From whom does this giant glow come? First approach to the bioluminescence of Dalatias licha
1.    Laurent Duchatelet, UCLouvain, Marine Biology Laboratory
2.    Jérôme Mallefet, UCLouvain, Marine Biology Laboratory

Among luminous elasmobranchs, the kitefin shark, Dalatias licha, is a giant reaching up to 1.8 m. Here, through
pharmacological and histological studies, bioluminescence of the largest luminous vertebrate is unveiled. Light organ
(photophore) histology and bioluminescence control mechanisms are compared with known luminous elasmobranchs
(Etmopterus species and S. aliae). Photophore histology revealed a conserved structure among the Dalatiidae family.
Dalatiidae sharks harbor photophores constituted of a single photocyte (light emitting cell) encapsulated in a pigmented layer,
surmounted by an iris-like structure (ILS) and topped by one or several lens cells. Etmopteridae photophores are more
complex. They are composed of a black round shaped pigmented sheath encompassing group of photogenic cells, a lens
formed by 2 to 3 lens cells, and an ILS formed by chromatophores.
In parallel, a similar hormonal control of the light emission is highlighted. Melatonin triggers light production, while alpha-
melanocyte stimulating and adrenocorticotropic hormones inhibit it. For both families, ILS pigment motion is involved in a
mechanical regulation of the light emission. Recently, an extraocular opsin (encephalopsin) was also demonstrated as playing
a role in the light emission control in Etmopteridae. The encephalopsin presence was recently described during the ontogenic
development of the photophore from the dalatiid S. aliae. Hence leading to the search for D. licha extraocular opsin.
By integrating the new data on the largest luminous vertebrate, D. licha, to previous researches, a comparative analysis will be
conducted to highlight a clear bioluminescent structure and control mechanism conservation throughout evolution in luminous
deep-sea sharks.


Keywords: deep-sea sharks; bioluminescence control; Dalatiidae; Etmopteridae; hormones
SI Abstract Ref: 322




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 21
Jenny Bortoluzzi
Trinity College Dublin,The University of Dublin

Baby blues? The reproductive state and nutritional ecology of female blue sharks, Prionace glauca, in
Irish waters.
1.    Jenny Bortoluzzi; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin
2.    Nicholas Payne; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin
3.    Martin J. Kainz; WasserCluster Lunz and Danube University Krems
4.    James Gelslechter; University of North Florida
5.    Lucy Harding; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin
6.    Alison Boyce; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin
7.    Luke Harman; University College Cork
8.    Matthew Cobain; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin
9.    Haley Dolton; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin
10.   Grace McNicholas; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin and the Marine Institute
11.   David Edwards, West Cork Charters
12.   Maria McGuinness; University College Cork
13.   Thomas K. Doyle; University College Cork
14.   Andrew L. Jackson; Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin

Despite being one of the most abundant pelagic and most wide ranging shark in the world, much still needs to be learnt about
blue shark biology and ecology. As the most frequently fished oceanic shark, the population is reported to have declined by up
to 70% in the Atlantic, which raises concerns about the future survival of the species. Life history parameters and knowledge of
a species’ ecology are key for management and conservation, particularly when the protection of larger areas is not feasible. In
Irish waters, the population of blue sharks present during the late spring to early autumn is predominantly female but
information about their reproductive status and feeding ecology during this time is lacking. Here, we integrate the results from
sex steroid hormone analysis (progesterone and 17β-oestradiol) in blood plasma to assess reproductive status. In addition,
using omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in both plasma and muscle tissues, we investigate the effect of nutrition and
diet strategies on the reproductive state of female blue sharks. We will also present data on hydrogen stable isotopes of PUFA
to indicate the ability of blue sharks to perform endogenous conversion of dietary PUFA into important physiological omega-3
PUFA.

Keywords: reproductive state; fatty acids; sex steroid hormones; feeding ecology; nutrition
SI Abstract Ref: 343




Felicie Dhellemmes
Bimini Biological Field station

What did we learn from six years of shark personality research?
1.    Jean Sebastien, Finger; Bimini Biological Field station
2.    Joffrey Baeyaert; Algarve University
3.    Raquel Braun; Bimini Biological Field station
4.    Liam Dickson; Queen mary University London
5.    Tristan Guttridge; Bimini Biological Field station
6.    Harry Gray; Cardiff University
7.    Nigel Hussey; Windsor University
8.    Matthew Smukall; Bimini Biological Field station
9.    Jens Krause; Leibniz Institute of freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries

In behavioural ecology, interest in the study of animal personality (i.e. consistent individual differences in behaviour) has
increased in the last two decades as it is believed to have important ecological and evolutionary consequences. These
consequences are especially pronounced when personality covaries with other behaviours (i.e. behavioural syndrome) or with
life-history (i.e. pace-of-life syndrome). So far, studies of personality on behavioural, and pace-of-life-syndromes have produced
ambiguous outcomes, and the prominence of studies on captive animals in the literature may be a reason for inconclusive
results.
To address this knowledge gap, we tested personality in wild juvenile lemon shark (Negaprion brevirostris) from 2012 to 2018
to investigate the emergence of behavioural and pace-of-life-syndromes under relevant ecological pressures.
We first explored how to quantify meaningful personality traits in our study species. We then investigated (1) whether a
behavioural syndrome existed between two consistent traits and whether the appearance of the syndrome was context
dependent, (2) whether a growth-mortality trade-off was mediated by personality and (3) whether personality could predict the
foraging habitat of sharks and whether this link was context-dependent.
Overall, our research suggest that ecological conditions play a crucial role in the emergence and the shaping of personality and
trait association. This work offers a possible explanation for the ambiguous results of previous studies and highlights the
importance of increasing the focus on wild study systems in future animal personality research. Along with recent revisions of
the personality research framework, this work may help paving the way for future shark-personality research.




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 22
Keywords: personaliy; pace-of-life; foraging specialization
SI Abstract Ref: 367




Diego Fallas-Madrigal
Biomolecular Laboratory, Center for International Programs and Sustainability Studies, Universidad Veritas, San
José, Costa Rica

Research and conservation of the eagle ray (Aetobatus laticeps)
1.    Alejandra, Castelo-Corona Sebastian; Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz Baja California Sur, México
2.    Maria del Socorro, Gonzáles-Ramos, Biomolecular Laboratory, Center for International Programs and Sustainability
      Studies, Universidad Veritas, San José, Costa Rica.

The Pacific white-spotted eagle ray Aetobatus laticeps, has been recently separated from the Atlantic A. narinari
based on both morphological and genetic evidence. This species is distributed from the Golf of California to
Ecuador, where different research efforts have been done. Considering the conservation need and lack of
information in this species, we have studied its population, habitat use, and spot pattern variation along its
distribution. By using different methodologies, we have found 132 individuals in Oaxaca (Mexico), and 72 in the
north of Costa Rica. First recorded sizes in Jalisco (Mexico) ranged from 50 to 130 cm in disc width, and
encounter rates were found to be significantly in spring seasons with SST fluctuation of 25°-27°C. Furthermore, a
first assessment of the spot pattern in northern Costa Rica showed 17 distinctive spots, and an additional
putative eagle ray species from Cocos Island with a spot pattern resembling to its sister species, A. ocellatus.
Now in a regional scale we are continuing studying this species with new aims, such as spot pattern change,
diversity pattern along its distribution, site fidelity, population structures, as well as contributing in global efforts to
study the white spotted eagle rays.


Keywords: spotted eagle ray




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                        Page 23
Threats Beyond Overfishing 2


Noémie Coulon
Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD, SU, UCN,
UA, 35800, Dinard, France

Northeast Atlantic elasmobranchs on the move: different responses to climate change across functional
traits and phylogeny
1.    Noémie, Coulon; Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD, SU,
      UCN, UA, 35800, Dinard, France
2.    Sophie, Elliott; Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire, SP6 1EF, England
3.    Nils, Teichert; Noémie, Coulon; Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN,
      CNRS, IRD, SU, UCN, UA, 35800, Dinard, France
4.    Thomas, Barreau; Service des stations Marine, CRESCO, Dinard, France
5.    Alexandre, Carpentier; Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS,
      IRD, SU, UCN, UA, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France

Ongoing climate change is responsible for shifting the distribution of many marine species and may lead to changes in
community structure and ecosystem functioning, especially where species perform unique functions such as elasmobranchs.
However, this issue has been rarely studied in these species due to the limited amount of occurrence data and may have led to
an underestimation of the underlying threats. It can be circumvented by identifying functional traits that explain range shifts in
elasmobranchs rather than by studying individual species responses. Therefore, our aim was to detect and quantify distribution
changes in demersal elasmobranchs in response to ocean acidification and increasing sea temperature and assess whether
such changes can be attributed to their functional traits. To undertake this study, we collated scientific bottom trawl surveys
data from 1997-2020 across the European continental shelf and employed a multispecies joint distribution model to model their
habitat and understand potential variations in distribution with time according to sea water temperature and pH. The responses
of trophic level, reproductive guild, preferred depth and latitudinal range traits according to these climate change variables were
equally explored. From this analysis we highlight species whose range has shifted over the past two decades. Community
structure variations are described over time and functional groups that are appear to be more vulnerable to future climate
changes identified. Fishing pressure is also tested as a complementary factor affecting elasmobranch distribution over time

Keywords: climate change; elasmobranchs; functional traits; jSDM; shift
SI Abstract Ref: 265




Natascha Wosnick
Universidade Federal do Paraná

The effects of arsenic, lead and mercury muscle assimilation on physiological pathways in the Brazilian
Guitarfish, Pseudobatos horkelii
1.    Natascha, Wosnick; Universidade Federal do Paraná
2.    Natalia ,Guimarães; Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
3.    Renata Daldin, Leite; Universidade Federal do Paraná
4.    Ana Paula Chaves, Silva; Universidade de São Paulo
5.    Eloísa Pinheiro, Giareta; Universidade Federal do Paraná
6.    Amanda Pontes, Lopes; Fundação Oswaldo Cruz
7.    Francielli Casanova, Monteiro; Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro
8.    Carlos, Massone; Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro
9.    Renato, Carreira; Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro
10.   Marcelo, Vianna; Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
11.   Rachel Ann, Hauser-Davis; Fundação Oswaldo Cruz


Metal contamination is one of the emerging threats with the potential to negatively affect marine animals, being of particular
relevance to coastal mesopredators with resident behavior due to the expressive influx of anthropogenic origin across their
home range. Currently, most toxicological investigations with elasmobranchs are focused on toxic metals and human
consumption outcomes. Nevertheless, the effects of contamination on the systemic health of exposed animals have been
systematically neglected. That said, this study aimed to evaluate the potential effects of muscle assimilation of arsenic, lead,
and mercury on the anaerobic metabolism and buffering capacity of the Brazilian Guitarfish through the assessment of serum
lactate and pH. Arsenic concentrations ranged from 0.97 to 79.7, lead from undetectable to 0.07, and mercury from 0.03 to
0.49. Surprisingly, a positive correlation between arsenic and pH was detected, and higher pH was observed in more
contaminated animals. Taken together, the results indicate that arsenic, lead and mercury accumulation in the muscle does not
affect anaerobic metabolism nor the buffering capacity of exposed Pseudobatos horkelii. However, it is not possible to rule out
the deleterious effects on other physiological processes, such as aerobic metabolism. Complementary analyses are needed to
elucidate the unexpected correlation between higher arsenic values and the observed alkalosis as well as the higher pH levels
on guitarfishes presenting higher levels of the metals assessed in this investigation.

Keywords: toxicology; physiology; guitarfish; marine pollution
SI Abstract Ref: 284




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 24
Iliana Araceli Fonseca Ponce
Proyecto Manta Pacific Mexico; Instituto Nacional de México campus Bahía de Banderas

Physical and environmental drivers of oceanic manta ray (Mobula birostris) sightings at an aggregation
site in Bahía de Banderas, Mexico
1.    Iliana Araceli, Fonseca Ponce; Proyecto Manta Pacific Mexico; Instituto Nacional de México campus Bahía de Banderas.
2.    Aldo Alfonso, Zavala Jiménez; Proyecto Manta Pacific Mexico; University of California, Campus Santa Cruz.
3.    Octavio, Aburto Oropeza; Scripps Institution of Oceanography.
4.    Adrián, Maldonado Gasca; Instituto Nacional de México, Campus Bahía de Banderas.
5.    Felipe, Galvan Magaña; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas (CICIMAR-IPN).
6.    Rogelio, González Armas; Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas (CICIMAR-IPN).
7.    Joshua David, Stewart; Marine Mammal Institute, Department of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Conservation Sciences, Hatfield
      Marine Science Center, Oregon State University; The Manta Trust.

In Banderas Bay, Mexico, an important aggregation site of oceanic manta rays occurs adjacent to a major human population
center (Puerto Vallarta) in a region of high vessel traffic and fishing effort. Manta rays in this population have 10 times the per-
capita incidence of injuries from vessel strikes and fishing gear entanglements compared to an offshore population of mantas at
the protected Revillagigedo Islands, only ~300 miles away. To identify the locations and periods of highest risk of
anthropogenic impacts on this population, we have been surveying coastal habitats in Banderas Bay at weekly intervals in
partnership with local fishermen since 2014, collecting in-situ environmental data and recording sightings of manta rays. We
show that the El Niño Southern Oscillation has an extremely strong influence on the occupancy probability of manta rays in
Banderas Bay, and that there is a clear seasonal cycle of visitation to the region. We also show significant relationships
between occupancy and sea surface temperature, lunar phase and tidal range. We found that the presence of manta rays was
positively related to some zooplankton taxonomic groups such as copepods, cladocerans and fish larvae. We hypothesize that
mantas are primarily feeding on mesopelagic prey in a submarine canyon adjacent to the aggregation area and using the
shallow nearshore zone for thermal recovery. This information on seasonal, physical, and environmental drivers of manta ray
occupancy creates opportunities for dynamic management strategies that may prevent and mitigate anthropogenic impacts on
this vulnerable population.

Keywords: zooplankton; filter-feeder; elasmobranch; GAM; ENSO
SI Abstract Ref: 295




Guia Consales
Department of Physical Sciences, Earth and Environment, University of Siena, Via Mattioli 4, Siena 53100, Italy
Department of Integrative Marine Ecology (EMI), Genoa Marine Centre (GMC), Stazione Zoologica Anton
Dohrn–National Institute of Marine Biology,

The blackmouth catshark, Galeus melastomus, as potential bioindicator for Mediterranean deep-sea
environment contamination
1.    Guia Consales; Department of Physical Sciences, Earth and Environment, University of Siena, Via Mattioli 4, Siena
      53100, Italy; Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - Italian National Institute for
      Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Genoa Marine Centre, c/o CNR-IAS, Via De Marini, 6 16149 Genoa, Italy
2.    Massimiliano Bottaro; Department of Integrative Marine Ecology (EMI), Genoa Marine Centre (GMC), Stazione Zoologica
      Anton Dohrn–National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Villa del Principe, Piazza del Principe 4,
      16126 Genoa, Italy.
3.    Cecilia Mancusi; ARPAT - Regional Agency for Environmental Protection of Tuscany, Via Marrani 114, 57126 Livorno,
      Italy.
4.    Alessandra Neri; Consortium for the Inter-University Center of Marine Biology and Applied Ecology “G.Bacci”, Viale
      Nazario Sauro 4, 57128 Livorno, Italy
5.    Maria Pia Mordente; Department of Physical Sciences, Earth and Environment, University of Siena, Via Mattioli 4, Siena
      53100, Italy
6.    Maria Bisignano; Department of Physical Sciences, Earth and Environment, University of Siena, Via Mattioli 4, Siena
      53100, Italy
7.    Letizia Marsili; Department of Physical Sciences, Earth and Environment, University of Siena, Via Mattioli 4, Siena 53100,
      Italy; Inter-University Center of Cetacean Research (CIRCE), Via Mattioli 4, Siena 53100, Italy

The deep-sea is the largest and most productive habitat of the planet, but scarce information regarding pollution is available.
The Mediterranean is one of the most anthropized maritime areas, where old and new generation contamination pose a threat
to the conservation of local biodiversity. For this reason, it is an excellent natural laboratory for studying the impacts of these
chemical compounds in the deep-sea.
As the chondrichthyans are important consumers below 400 m, we studied the presence of organochlorine contaminants-OCs,
from the Ligurian Sea to the Gulf of Naples, in the blackmouth catshark, Galeus melastomus, a widely distributed deep-water
opportunistic species.
Hexachlorobenzene-HCB, polychlorinated biphenyls-PCBs, and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane and its metabolites-DDTs,
were determined in the liver and muscle of 73 specimens.



                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 25
PCBs were the most abundant and the use of an enriched op’ formula of DDT was highlighted. As well as the use of Dicofol
especially in the Gulf of Naples, the most anthropized study site.
Despite the higher levels of all the three OC group in the liver compared to those detected in the muscle, our findings suggest
that this tissue could be used as indicator of chronic exposure to pollutants, but to clearly understand the real impacts of
pollutants in the deep sea further studies in others areas is needed.
In this framework, G. melastomus presents interesting features to serve as potential bioindicator for the Mediterranean deep-
sea due to its feeding habits, remarkable abundance and current conservation status (“Least Concern” for the Mediterranean
IUCN Red List).

Keywords: bioindicator; deep-sea; Galeus melastomus; Mediterranean Sea; organochlorine contaminants (OCs)
SI Abstract Ref: 31




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 26
Wednesday 12th October, 2022

Threatened Species - Spotlight on Mackerel Sharks 1



Marc Aquino Baleyto
CICIMAR-IPN

Diving deeper into the underlying white shark behaviors at Guadalupe Island, Mexico
1.  Marc, Aquino-Baleytó; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico
2.  Vianey, Leos-Barajas; University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
3.  Timo, Adam; University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK
4.  Mauricio, Hoyos-Padilla; Pelagios-Kakunjá, La Paz, Mexico
5.  Omar, Santana-Morales; Ecocimati AC, Ensenada, Mexico
6.  Felipe, Galván-Magaña; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico
7.  Rogelio, González-Armas; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico
8.  Christopher G., Lowe; Department of Biological Sciences, California State University Long Beach, Long Beach, California,
    USA
9. James T., Ketchum; Pelagios-Kakunjá, La Paz, Mexico
10. Héctor, Villalobos; Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico

1. Fine-scale movement patterns are driven by both biotic (hunting, physiological needs) and abiotic (environmental conditions)
factors. The energy balance governs all movement-related strategic decisions.
2. Marine environments can be better understood by considering the vertical component. From 24 acoustic trackings of 10
white sharks in Guadalupe Island, this study linked, for the first time, horizontal and vertical movement data and inferred six
different behavioral states along with movement states, through the use of hidden Markov models, which allowed to draw a
comprehensive picture of white shark behavior.
3. Traveling was the most frequent state of behavior for white sharks, carried out mainly at night and twilight. In contrast, area-
restricted searching was the least used, occurring primarily in daylight hours.
4. Time of day, distance to shore, total shark length, and, to a lesser extent, tide phase affected behavioral states. Chumming
activity reversed, in the short term and in a nonpermanent way, the behavioral pattern to a general diel vertical pattern.

Keywords: Bayesian inference; behavioral states; energy costs; movement strategies; telemetry
SI Abstract Ref: 136




Enrico Gennari
Oceans Research Institute; Rhodes University; South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity

Exploring recovery potential for white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) in South Africa: is prohibition
enough?
1.    Heather Bowlby; Fisheries and Oceans Canada.
2.    Neil Hammerschlag; University of Miami.
3.    Dylan Irion; University of Cape Town.
4.    Enrico Gennari; Oceans Research Institute; South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity

It is often difficult to assess whether a prohibition to exploitation ensures effective conservation or recovery of a particular at-
risk, wide-ranging species, especially with the continued presence of different types of pressures within its range. This is the
case for white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) in South Africa, which have been protected since 1991, yet recent declines at
two aggregation sites have renewed conservation concerns. Empirical data on population dynamics, the magnitude of threats,
and regional trends for white sharks remain largely unavailable, yet there is widespread acceptance that conservation decision-
making should not be delayed because of scientific uncertainty. To facilitate a better understanding of risks for precautionary
management and provide guidance on possible appropriate actions, we used simulation modeling of four life history scenarios
for white sharks contextualizing the potential population response to multiple levels of mortality. Most scenarios indicated that
annual removals in the tens of individuals would substantially limit the potential for and magnitude of any abundance increase
following prohibition in 1991. Average known removals of white sharks occurring in the bather protection program since the
1990s have typically remained higher than these thresholds. If white sharks in southern Africa are characterized by a long
lifespan and/or a small population size, the proportion of trajectories declining or becoming functionally extinct over the next
generation could be substantial. These results highlight the specific challenges associated with the conservation of white
sharks in South Africa, and suggest new mitigation measures may be required to ensure functional protection and population
recovery

Keywords: white shark; conservation; bather protection program; management; South Africa
SI Abstract Ref: 108




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 27
Adrienne Gooden
Finders University - Southern Shark Ecology Group

Does the increase in shark activity during wildlife tourism lead to higher energy expenditure?
1.    Thomas, Clarke; Flinders University - Southern Shark Ecology Group, Department for Environment and Water
2.    Lauren, Meyer; Flinders University - Southern Shark Ecology Group, Georgia Aquarium
3.    Charlie, Huveneers; Flinders University - Southern Shark Ecology Group

Wildlife tourism is expanding globally, as is the need to quantify its potential impacts on the species targeted. Studies on the
effects of marine tourism on wildlife have focused on documenting behavioural changes, but whether changes affect the energy
budgets and ultimately the survival prospects of these animals is largely unknown. This is particularly acute for large predatory
sharks that are difficult to study but economically and ecologically important. To assess the effects of cage-diving on white
shark energy expenditure, animal-borne cameras and accelerometer loggers were deployed on 18 white sharks (Carcharodon
carcharias) at a cage-diving site (Neptune Islands Group Marine Park, South Australia) and recorded shark activity for 489.7
hours. A random forest machine learning algorithm was used to predict their behaviours based on 38 hours of acceleration data
with behaviours confirmed from the animal-borne cameras. The presence of cage-diving vessels led to white sharks being
more active and spending more time undertaking high-energy swimming (vectorial dynamic body acceleration [VeDBA] 0.04 ±
0.03 g; doubled) and bursts of acceleration (VeDBA 0.44 ± 0.38 g; seven-fold increase) while decreasing low-energy swimming
(1.5-fold). However, once put in the context of daily energy budget and accounting for the duration of cage-diving activities (~6
hours per day), energy expenditure was not substantially affected by wildlife tourism, with the presence of cage-diving vessels
leading to a 0.4 – 0.7 % increase in field metabolic rate. Our findings show that while food-based tourism can influence white
shark behaviour and increase energy expenditure, the overall impact on field metabolic rates and daily energy budget is
minimal.

Keywords: animal-borne camera; accelerometer; metabolic rate; wildlife tourism; machine learning
SI Abstract Ref: 92




Charlie Huveneers
Flinders University

Effects of wildlife tourism on white shark associative behaviour and implications for human safety
1.    Yuri Niella, Flinders University
2.    Hugh Pederson, Innovasea
3.    Charlie Huveneers, Flinders University

While wildlife tourism may impact the animals involved, it plays a critical role in public awareness and conservation.
Understanding changes in animal behaviour in response to tourism activities can inform the trade-offs between negative
impacts and socio-economic benefits. The movements of 133 white sharks were tracked with acoustic telemetry between 2013
and 2021 at the Neptune Islands, Australia. We used three behavioural variables (i.e. daily hours of arrival, time spent near
cage-diving boats, and residency) to investigate whether tourism led to associative behaviour using a combination of k-mean
clustering with Generalised Additive Mixed Models and Analysis of Variance. Significant clusters of individuals were found for
all variables tested. Different trends were observed between clusters, but did not vary within individuals from the same clusters,
suggesting complex individual temperaments. Some sharks tended to arrive earlier to match the arrival of the cage-diving
boats, but the residency and amount of time near cage-diving boats significantly decreased over time for some other sharks.
There are public claims that cage-diving activities may condition white sharks to interact with boats, potentially increasing shark
bite risk. Our results suggest that while some associative behaviour was observed, a loss of response to the stimulus used to
attract sharks, i.e. habituation, might also be occurring. White shark cage-diving is a global industry, dispelling myths about
these iconic animals. Despite complex temperaments across different individuals, long-term impacts of cage-diving activities
affecting white shark behaviour are unlikely.

Keywords: wildlife tourism; cognitive behaviour; associative learning; acoustic tracking; white shark cage-diving
SI Abstract Ref: 77




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 28
Olga M. Azevedo
Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Italy

The influence of environmental factors on individual behaviour of bait-attracted white sharks in South
Africa.
1.    Olga, M. Azevedo; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Italy.
2.    Ana, M. Correia; Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research; Department of Biology, Faculty of
      Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal.
3.    Giuseppe, Rijllo; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Italy.
4.    Gianni, Giglio; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Italy.
5.    Chiara, Romano; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Italy.
6.    Francesca, Reinero; The Sharks Studies Centre, Scientific Institute, Italy.
7.    Primo, Micarelli; The Sharks Studies Centre, Scientific Institute, Italy.
8.    Emilio, Sperone; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Italy.


Feared by some and loved by others, the white shark (Carcharodon carcharias) is a charismatic species, targeted by different
research studies over the last decades. Advances in biologging tags allowed to track the hidden distribution of these predators.
However, there is still a lack of knowledge about the influence of environmental factors on their behaviour. Indeed, considering
the global distribution of white sharks, it is a challenge to understand the processes influencing their lifecycle, and to assess the
anthropogenic disturbances to their populations. Dyer Island in South Africa is a well-known aggregation area for Carcharodon
carcharias, with an established cage-diving ecotourism industry. This activity was used as a platform of opportunity to collect
data on the sharks’ behaviour. We applied an ethological approach to investigate the influence of environmental factors on the
complexity of individual behaviours. The biotic conditions of the moment had a different impact on the reactions of females and
males towards the bait. Females performed a higher number of behaviours under daylight, lower sea surface temperatures,
short wavelets, clear skies, under La Niña events, and high tides. Males behaved more complexly at dusk, medium sea surface
temperatures, large wavelets, few clouds, hight tides and elevated moonlight. White sharks often swim over recreational waters
or fishing areas and human encounters, fishing mortality, and climate change are pressures that need to be addressed. The
applied ethological approach increases knowledge on how the species responds to environmental factors, therefore informing
policy-makers and supporting its conservation.

Keywords: white shark; environmental factors; behaviour
SI Abstract Ref: 50




Sian Liddy
University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences

Characterising shark holobionts, the myth of the lone predator
1.    Sian Liddy; University of Sydney
2.    Amy Smoothey; NSW Department of Primary Industries
3.    Jadranka Nappi; University of New South Wales
4.    Sebastian Vadillo Gonzalez; University of Sydney
5.    Torsten Thomas; University of New South Wales
6.    Ezequiel Marzinelli; University of Sydney

Shark populations are declining globally, yet many aspects of their physiology and life history are still poorly understood. Most
of our understanding and management of sharks is based on our knowledge of their biology and interactions with other macro-
organisms. Sharks live, however, in the ocean in a “soup” of microorganisms. Evidence from systems as diverse as plants,
invertebrates and humans shows that microorganisms associated with these hosts play critical roles in their health and
function. Our understanding of host-microbiome interactions in sharks is limited, but such knowledge can help develop more
robust conservation management tools. Here, we characterised the microbiome of Great White, Bull, Port Jackson and Dusky
Whaler sharks in Australia via 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing. To understand what influences variation in microbial
community structure within and between shark individuals and species, we assessed bacteria associated to functionally distinct
body regions within each shark. There was strong variation between body regions, as well as between species. We discuss
potential drivers of such variation and the microbial taxa and functions associated with these differences. This is the first step in
understanding the role microbes play in the health and function of sharks.

Keywords: holobiont; microbiome; Carcharodon carcharias; Carcharhinus leucas; Heterodontus portusjacksoni
SI Abstract Ref: 22




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 29
Citizen Science & Environmental Education 1


Li Jin Chai
Marine Research and Conservation Foundation

Malaysia Whale Sharks: distribution, seasonality and threats
1.    Li Jin Chai, Borneo Marine Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400 Kota Kinabalu Sabah,
      Malaysia; Malaysia Whale Sharks, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
2.    Gonzalo Araujo, Malaysia Whale Sharks, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia; Marine Research and Conservation
      Foundation, Somerset, UK
3.    Nasrulhakim bin Maidin, Sabah Parks, P.O. Box 10626, 88806 Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
4.    Elvin M. Bavoh, Sabah Parks, P.O. Box 10626, 88806 Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
5.    Ruzlee Jumatin, Sabah Department of Fisheries, 4th Floor, Wisma Pertanian Sabah, Jalan Tasik, 88624 Kota Kinabalu,
      Sabah, Malaysia
6.    B. Mabel Manjaji-Matsumoto, Borneo Marine Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400 Kota
      Kinabalu Sabah, Malaysia; Malaysia Whale Sharks, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia

Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) were targeted by fisheries in Asia into the 2000s leading to declines in regional abundance
and its uplisting to ‘Endangered’ in the IUCN Red List. The Philippines hosts one of the largest populations globally, and
Indonesia hosts at least five known aggregation sites. In contrast, little is known about whale sharks in Malaysia. Here, we used
citizen science, survey effort and data mining to understand the species in Malaysia. We recorded 162 whale shark encounters
from news outlets, social media posts and contributions to the global database ‘Sharkbook.ai’ from 1996-2021. Of these, 80
whale sharks were identified using their unique spot patterns ranging 3.5-6.0 m in total length, most of whose sex was
undetermined (83%). This juvenile-dominated population demographic is consistent with neighbouring countries. Using photo-
ID one individual was matched between Pulau Redang and Chumphon in Thailand. Similarly, a whale shark from Philippines
was matched to Pulau Sipadan, Sabah. Both Sipadan and Redang have the highest incidences of whale sharks in Malaysia,
where these sharks appear to be navigating through like that observed elsewhere (e.g. Galapagos). In contrast, whale sharks
encountered along the west coast of Sabah (e.g. Pulau Gaya) appear to be capitalising on zooplankton. Through citizen
science and online reports, we report at least four whale sharks mortalities in Malaysia from anthropogenic causes (plastic
ingestion and direct harvest). Further work is needed to elucidate whale shark movements within and away from Malaysia, as
well as understanding their feeding ecology and persistent threats.

Keywords: Rhincodon typus; endangered; citizen science; Southeast Asia; population demographics
SI Abstract Ref: 320




Harriet Allen
The Shark Trust

The Great Eggcase Hunt - 20 years of citizen science
1.    Harriet, Allen; The Shark Trust
2.    Cat, Gordon; The Shark Trust
3.    Ali, Hood; The Shark Trust

The Great Eggcase Hunt is a citizen science initiative that has been running since 2003. In nearly 20 years, the project has
received >22,000 submissions from ~7,500 people, totalling ~334,000 eggcases from 18 oviparous elasmobranchs around the
British Isles. This dataset provides an opportunity to monitor public engagement with the project, tracking its growth and spread
over both space and time. Analysis of this dataset can be used to pick out patterns, such as the seasonality of public
engagement, and to identify locations that are lacking in records and may require more effort. The project has grown
considerably since its beginning; from 54 submissions totalling 128 eggcases, from 25 locations around the British Isles (mostly
in the Southwest where the Shark Trust is based) in its first year, to ~1,100 submissions totalling >27,500 eggcases, from >700
locations (covering the majority of the British Isles from the Isle of Wight to Orkney) in the first half of 2022 alone. As well as
citizen science engagement, the data from this project allows hotspots for eggcases and potential egg-laying grounds to be
identified, as well as further developing our understanding of eggcase morphology (e.g., the Common Skate complex).
Although established in the British Isles, the Great Eggcase Hunt receives submissions from around the world, including across
Europe and the Mediterranean, as well as Australia, South Africa, and the USA. The project continues to grow, with
identification resources in development for different regions and an app to make the submission process even easier.

Keywords: citizen science; eggcases; oviparous; Rajidae; Scyliorhinidae
SI Abstract Ref: 224




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 30
Elitza Germanov
Marine Megafauna Foundation, West Palm Beach, Florida, United States of America 1; Centre for Sustainable
Aquatic Ecosystems, Harry Butler Institute, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia 2;
Environmental and Conservation Sciences, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia 3

A decade of manta ray research and conservation in Indonesia
1.    Elitza S. Germanov
2.    Andrea D. Marshall
3.    Simon J. Pierce
4.    Lars Bejder; Marine Mammal Research Program, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii at
1.    Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii, United States
5.    I. Gede Hendrawan; Faculty of Marine Sciences and Fisheries, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia
6.    Neil Loneragan; Faculty of Fisheries and Marine Science, Bogor Institute of Agriculture, Bogor, West Java, Indonesia

Manta rays have some of the lowest estimated population growth rates for elasmobranchs, making them susceptible to drastic
declines from human threats. A decade ago, Indonesia simultaneously hosted one of the largest fisheries for mantas, along
with a major manta ray tourism industry. The high value of tourism was a strong argument for protection, but knowledge of
habitat use was necessary to create effective policy. Galvanizing tourism operators and the public, we used citizen science to
address knowledge gaps, identify manta ray hotspots, and provide baseline population data. We showed that manta rays
routinely moved beyond established conservation and tourism areas into areas of high fishing activity, warranting nationwide
species protection. That was then legislated in 2014.

Subsequently, we have provided longer-term characterizations of the habitat use, demographics, and remaining human threats
to manta ray aggregations within the Nusa Penida Marine Protected Area (MPA) and the Komodo National Park (NP). Using a
combination of active researcher and citizen science we established a high degree of site affinity to two sites within the Nusa
Penida MPA. One site was crucial for adult cleaning and mating, and the other for feeding juveniles. Habitat use in Komodo NP
follows a similar pattern, with four key sites identified.

Ongoing threats to manta rays in these areas include entanglement in fishing gear, plastic pollution, and growing tourism.
Future research aims to assess population dynamics and trends, and to characterize additional critical habitats in the region.


Keywords: photo-ID; population structure; movement; site use; coral triangle region
SI Abstract Ref: 149




Jennifer Keeping
University of Glasgow

Much ado about stingrays
1.    Jennifer Keeping, University of Glasgow
2.    David Bailey, University of Glasgow
3.    Charlotte Hopkins, University of Hull

This presentation intends to showcase the works completed during my MSc by research projects concerning the stingrays of
southern Mozambique, the research gaps I have identified therein and the preliminary results of my forthcoming PhD projects.
I intend to summarise the findings of the two published manuscripts from my MSc studies; the first detailing the validation of the
computer-aided, photo-identification of the smalleye stingray, Megatrygon microps, which is among the largest and most unique
species of stingrays in the world. The second manuscript describes the trends in the sightings of stingray in southern
Mozambique, using citizen-science collected data to determine seasonality and small-scale habitat movement of stingrays in
the diving region of Tofo, Mozambique.
I am now undergoing PhD research to continue to work on filling the many research gaps that I have identified during the MSc
work. My PhD topics include the use of stable isotope analysis to determine feeding ecology, habitat use and movements of
multiple stingray species in the Inhambane provincial region. These data will compliment the photo-ID and diver observations
already completed, whilst increasing our knowledge surrounding the differing trophic roles of each stingray species, their
importance to the ecosystem and, most notably, reveal more about their movements to the ocean zones that are unavailable
with the satellite and acoustic tags traditionally used in movement telemetry studies.


Keywords: stingray; mozambique; ecology; stable isotope; photo-ID
SI Abstract Ref: 129




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 31
Citizen Science & Environmental Education 2


Georgia Jones
Bournemouth University

UK recreational shark angler practices, perceptions and attitudes; bridging the gap between scientists
and anglers for the benefit of sharks
1.    Jones, G.C.A.
2.    Murphy, S.
3.    Rudd, H.
4.    Somerfield, P.
5.    Thomas, S.F.
6.    Stewart, B.D.

Recreational anglers are important stakeholders in global fisheries and have capacity to provide valuable data for scientific
research and conservation management of threatened species. Recreational angling for sharks has a long history in the UK,
and is seeing a renewed surge in popularity, but tensions exist between anglers and scientists over mistrust of how data will be
used and issues around some cases of poor shark handling. The result has been a loss of data sharing and a stymied
understanding of UK shark populations, especially for several threatened species that are considered data-poor. Here we
present the results of the first project initiated by a new collaboration ‘Shark Hub UK’, which aims to bring anglers and scientists
together as equals, for sharks. Our questionnaire was completed by 169 anglers from right around the UK and provided novel
insights into the distribution and intensity of recreational angling activities for UK sharks, the handling methods currently
employed and angler attitudes towards shark management and data sharing. The results will guide future shark handling best-
practice guidance for anglers, rebuild trust between anglers and scientists, and highlight avenues for key future research into
UK shark ecology and conservation.

Keywords: recreational angling; best-practice handling; UK sharks; stakeholder engagement
SI Abstract Ref: 80




Katie Hindle
A Rocha Kenya

Biodiversity and conservation of elasmobranchs in Watamu Marine National Park, Kenya
1.    Katie, Hindle: A Rocha Kenya.
2.    Eric, Thuranira; A Rocha Kenya.
3.    Peter, Musila; A Rocha Kenya.
4.    Colin, Jackson; A Rocha Kenya.
5.    Stanley, Baya; A Rocha Kenya.
6.    Queen, Harare; A Rocha Kenya.
7.    Robert, Sluka; A Rocha International.

The no-take MPA in Watamu Kenya houses a diversity of IUCN Red List threatened elasmobranchs and serves as a nursery
area for at least one of these species. The surrounding community is growing in its understanding of the intrinsic and natural
capital value of these species through creative educational opportunities both in schools and among artisanal fishers.

Ten elasmobranch species were observed using four methods (BRUVs, Timed Swims, Beach walks, and Diving surveys):
Taeniura lymma, Glaucostegus halavi, Carcharhinus melanopterus, Neotrygon caeruleopunctata, Himantura gerrardi,
Himantura uarnak, Triaenodon obesus, Torpedo sinuspersici, Aetobatus narinari, and Rhincodon typus. The most abundant
species were Carcharhinus melanopterus, Taeniura lymma, and Neotrygon caeruleopunctata. Elasmobranchs were observed
most often over sand habitat (56%) followed by seagrass (33%), and coral (11%).

Larger Blacktip reef sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus), majority females were seen August – November. Most small pups
appeared along the shallow sandy areas along the length of WMNP’s beach from October onwards with a decline of larger
sharks around this time. Footage of a shark that appears to show afterbirth with a larger male following was recorded in early
November possibly indicating WMNP as an important pupping ground.

Environmental education created awareness among community members. Programs were conducted in 8 schools reaching
320 students and 10 community groups reaching 237 individuals. An artisanal fishing competition was held for the first time
which involved the use of hooks of a specific size to emphasize the importance of sustainable fishing methods and
conservation of elasmobranchs.


Keywords: MPA; nursery; guitarfish; shark; ray
SI Abstract Ref: 72




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 32
Jennifer Olbers
WILDTRUST

A cross-disciplinary approach to the protection of South Africa’s threatened sharks and rays
1.    Jennifer, Olbers; WILDTRUST
2.    Nikki, Chapman; WILDTRUST
3.    Sandile, Ntuli; WILDTRUST
4.    Summer, Newton; WILDTRUST
5.    Jean, Harris; WILDTRUST
6.    Lauren, van Nijkerk; WILDTRUST
7.    Geremy Cliff; Research Associate of University of KwaZulu-Natal

South Africa is a global hotspot for chondrichthyan diversity while providing important habitats for many threatened species.
Despite a rich history of shark research and management in South Africa, there are knowledge gaps, inadequate statutory
interventions ensuring adequate protection, and a lack of capacity to effectively enforce current legal provisions. Furthermore,
public perceptions about sharks are in general, negative, and based on incorrect information. To improve the protection of
threatened (Vulnerable, Endangered, and Critically Endangered) species, prioritizing South African endemics, the WILDTRUST
through their marine programme, WILDOCEANS, together with the Shark Conservation Fund and many other partners,
implemented a 3-year Shark and Ray Protection Project. A campaign called Shark Attack was launched in March 2020,
highlighting the plight of South Africa’s chondrichthyans and actively attempting to shift negative perceptions and inspire
positive action through its website, social media platforms, and traditional media. The following content are available for
download online: database and annotated checklist comprising all known chondrichthyan species found in South African
waters, detailed status reports on 90 threatened and/or endemic species, a field guide of threatened and endemic species for
law enforcement officers, online species ID workshops, draft recommendations for improved statutory modifications to SA
legislation, shark and ray systematic conservation plan report, with associated R-scripts, highlighting essential habitats for
shark and ray MPA’s or shark sanctuaries, trade toolkit for law enforcement in numerous ports of entry and various information
pack and policy brief for decision-makers. The presentation aims to highlight the successes of this collaborative project.

Keywords: conservation; southern africa; threatened species; endemic; Chondrichthyes
SI Abstract Ref: 48




Evan Prasky
Northeastern University

Quantifying angler perceptions about shark depredation through stakeholder engagement
1.    Evan, Prasky; Northeastern University
2.    Marcus, Drymon; Mississippi State University
3.    Amanda, Jefferson ; Mississippi–Alabama Sea Grant
4.    Mandy, Karnauskas; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
5.    Savannah, Swinea; Northeastern University
6.    Steven, Scyphers; University of South Alabama

The Gulf of Mexico (GoM) is home to 31 federally managed reef fish species that are both commercially and recreationally
important for communities in the region. These fish are federally managed through a series of stock assessments and a
scientific understanding of natural lifecycles. Depredation, defined as the partial or complete removal of a captured species by a
non-target species, is a cause of increased mortality and is not well quantified or understood. Mounting voices from anglers in
the community suggest depredation is not only a prevalent and pervasive issue across the Gulf but also is rapidly increasing.
Because of this, fisheries managers cannot effectively capture true population numbers derived from stock assessments.
Depredation is a complex social-ecological issue that occurs between a multitude of species and is not required to be reported.
Therefore, we have turned to anglers across the GoM to gain insights into their perceptions, interactions, and identification of
the main causes and drivers of depredation to better assist in the classification and characterization to increase the accuracy of
fisheries managers’ stock assessments. To do this, we distributed a Gulf-wide survey (n = 1044) that focused on building
cognitive maps to highlight the perceptions anglers have on depredation. We also asked questions that quantified key factors
that have influenced depredation, such as seasonal variation and fishing habits, to better understand the human-wildlife conflict
that depredation is causing. Using the information gathered, we can begin to more accurately assess how depredation impacts
anglers and stock assessments.

Keywords: shark depredation; human-wildlife conflict; cognitive maps; community perceptions; stakeholder attitudes
SI Abstract Ref: 33




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 33
Sensory Biology, Feeding Habits & Metabolism 1


Robert Priester
Okeanos – University of the Azores

Trophic ecology and coastal habitat use of two sympatric shark species in the Azores archipelago (mid-
Atlantic) assessed with CNS stable isotope analysis
1.    C. Robert, Priester; Okeanos – University of the Azores.
2.    Jan, Dierking; GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel.
3.    David, Abecasis; CCMAR – Centre of Marine Sciences, University of Algarve
4.    Pedro, Afonso; IMAR/Okeanos – University of the Azores

The anthropogenic exploitation of marine resources has caused drastic declines of large predatory fishes. Amongst these,
sharks are of major conservation concern due to their high vulnerability to overfishing and role as top predators. The Azores
Islands, Mid Atlantic, are thought to serve as essential fish habitat (EFH - waters necessary to fish for spawning, breeding,
feeding or growth to maturity) for tope (Galeorhinus galeus) and smooth hammerhead (Sphyrna zygaena) sharks, but data to
better assess this role are scarce. To address existing knowledge gaps, here we provide the first comparative assessment of