oast (BB), as well as within ecoregions by ICES
Divisions. Over 8000 samples were collected (2004 – 2022) and genotyped. Subsequent quality control resulted in a SNP
dataset of >4000 SNPs for analyses.
Estimates of genetic diversity are provided among and within ecoregions. Small yet significant genetic differentiation was
evident globally (Fst,global = 0.0042) and among all ecoregions via pairwise Fst (Fst,GNS-CS = 0.003, Fst,CS-BB = 0.007,
Fst,GNS-BB = 0.009; p-values < 0.01). Only ICES Divisions 4b and 4c in the GNS (Fst,4b-4c = 0.00004, p = 0.144) showed no
significant genetic differentiation within ecoregions. AMOVA, discriminant component analysis, and admixture modelling
provide further evidence and describe the population structure on both hierarchical population levels investigated.
This is the largest known genetic study of Raja clavata, to our knowledge. This research helps to inform stock identification and
thus assessment, conservation and fisheries management, by accounting for genetic population structure at different spatial
scales in the North-East Atlantic.

Keywords: population structure; genetics; SNP; elasmobranch; North-East Atlantic
SI Abstract Ref: 62




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 57
Threatened Species - Spotlight on Mackerel Sharks 2


Francesca Romana Reinero
Sharks Studies Center-Scientific Institute, 58024 Massa Marittima, Italy; Department of Biology, Ecology and
Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy; Department of Political Science and CEFOP-LUISS,
LUISS Guido Carli University, 00197 R

Influence of environmental factors on prey discrimination of bait-attracted white sharks from Gansbaai,
South Africa
1.    Francesca Romana, Reinero; Sharks Studies Center-Scientific Institute, 58024 Massa Marittima, Italy
2.    Emilio, Sperone; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy
3.    Gianni, Giglio; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy
4.    Antonio, Pacifico; Department of Political Science and CEFOP-LUISS, LUISS Guido Carli University, 00197 Rome, Italy
5.    Primo, Micarelli; Sharks Studies Center-Scientific Institute, 58024 Massa Marittima, Italy

Influence of environmental factors on prey discrimination of bait-attracted white sharks were studied over a six-year period
(2008-2013) at Dyer Island Nature Reserve (Gansbaai, South Africa). This work deepens previous published study on surface
predatory behaviour of bait-attracted white sharks conducted in the same area where, from 240 predator-prey interactions
observed in the same period, both immature and mature white sharks were attracted from the seal shaped decoy rather than
the tuna bait, except for the years 2008 and 2011. Tide ranges, underwater visibility, water temperature, and sea conditions
are, in decreasing order, the factors that drive white sharks to the prey choice. High tide reduces the minimum depth from
which sharks could approach seals close to the shore, while a good visibility helps the sharks to use their vision ability to
implement predatory choices to energetical richer prey, the odorless seal shaped decoy. On the contrary, warmer water is
associated both with an increasing and diversity of teleosts which are prey of white sharks and to an increase of phytoplankton
that reduces the underwater visibility, driving them to the tuna bait choice. Finally, sea condition was almost always slightly
rough, ensuring a good average underwater visibility. Recommendations for future research work at this site are presented.

Keywords: Elasmobranch; environmental effects; predation; prey choice; sensory ecology
SI Abstract Ref: 64




Simon Berrow
1; Irish Basking shark Group, Merchants Quay, Kilrush, Co Clare, V15 E762, Ireland 2; Marine and Freshwater
Research Group, Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Road, Ireland

Annual courtship ‘torus’ behaviour of basking sharks Cetorhinus maximus identified in Irish waters
1.  David W. Sims, Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB, UK
2.  Simon D. Berrow, Irish Basking shark Group, Merchants Quay, Kilrush, Co Clare, V15 E762, Ireland
3.  Ken M. O’Sullivan, Woodview Park, Ennistymon, Clare, Ireland
4.  Nicholas J. Pfeiffer, MERC Ecological Consultants, Loughaunbeg, Inverin, Galway, Ireland
5.  Richard Collins, Irish Basking shark Group, Merchants Quay, Kilrush, Co Clare, V15 E762, Ireland
6.  Kev L. Smith, Woodview Park, Ennistymon, Clare, Ireland
7.  Brianna M. Pfeiffer, MERC Ecological Consultants, Loughaunbeg, Inverin, Galway, Ireland
8.  Paul Connery, MERC Ecological Consultants, Loughaunbeg, Inverin, Galway, Ireland
9.  Nuno Queiroz, CIBIO/InBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos/Rede de Investigação em
    Biodiversidade e Biologia Evolutiva, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-668 Vairão, Portugal
10. Nicolas E. Humphries, Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1
    2PB, UK
11. Freya C. Womersley,
12. Emily J. Southall Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB,
    UK

Many elasmobranchs exhibit complex courtship rituals. The function of large aggregations of basking sharks engaged in circling
behaviour largely remains a mystery. We present, underwater and aerial video recordings of multiple circling groups of basking
sharks in late summer (August to September) during years 2016–2021 in Ireland. Groups comprised females and males
numbering between 6 and 23 individuals that were not filter feeding. Grouped sharks swam slowly in a clockwise or
anticlockwise rotating ‘torus’ (diameter range: 17–39 m) consisting of circling individuals layered vertically from the surface to a
maximum depth of 16 m. Within a torus, sharks engaged in close-following, echelon, close flank-approach or parallel swimming
behaviours. Total body lengths of circling sharks overlapped known lengths of sexually mature individuals. In some toruses
female body coloration was paler than that of males. Within a torus individuals associated with most other members rapidly
(within minutes) indicating toroidal behaviours facilitate multiple interactions. Torus members also interacted through fin-fin and
fin-body contacts, rolling to expose ventral surfaces to following sharks, and breaching behaviour. We also confirmed that a
torus forms from shark following behaviour, and can change rotation direction frequently. Collectively, our observations explain
a courtship function for non-feeding circling groups. This study highlights the importance of coastal waters off western Ireland
as critical habitats supporting courtship reproductive behaviour of endangered basking sharks, the first such habitats identified
for this species globally. This has important conservation implications for a species recently given legal protection status in
Ireland.




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 58
Keywords: basking shark; courtship; torus; behaviour; Ireland
SI Abstract Ref: 89



Sofia Gabriel
Quantitative Marine Science Program, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
TAS, Australia

Fine-scale spatial usage of a coastal beach area by white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) as estimated
by a Hidden Markov Model informed by acoustic array data
1.    Sofia, Gabriel; Quantitative Marine Science Program, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
      Hobart, TAS, Australia
2.    Paige, Eveson; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia
3.    Russ, Bradford; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia
4.    David, Moreno; Fisheries and Aquaculture Centre, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
      Hobart, TAS, Australia
5.    Jayson, Semmens; Fisheries and Aquaculture Centre, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
      Hobart, TAS, Australia
6.    Toby, Patterson; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia

White shark movements are typically observed over large spatial scales (100s-1000s km2). However, observation of fine-scale
movement behaviour of white sharks is necessary to improve our understanding of their usage of near-shore coastal areas
where there is an increased probability of interactions between sharks and humans. Based on passive acoustic data from a
dense, but non-triangulating, array we investigated the fine scale movement of white sharks at a coastal beach within a nursery
area off Hawk’s Nest, New South Wales from 2010-2015. Using a spatial Hidden Markov Model (HMM) we were able to
estimate white shark movement tracks during each shark visit to the array based on detection binning over 5-minute time
intervals. The HMM also enabled direct estimation of the probability of detection as a function of distance from shark to acoustic
receivers. The HMM-estimated movement tracks predict heavy utilisation of very shallow water close to the high-water mark by
the sharks. Additionally, the southern end of the beach appears to be a focus for short term white shark residency at the beach.
The movement tracks estimated here allowed the first high-resolution investigation of white shark movements in the Hawk’s
Nest nursery area and demonstrate the potential for estimation of fine-scale position data from non-triangulating passive
acoustic monitoring arrays deployed in other coastal marine areas.

Keywords: Hidden Markov Models; animal movement; acoustic telemetry; Carcharodon carcharias
SI Abstract Ref: 130




Chelsea Gray and Emmett Johnston
Irish Basking Shark Group; George Mason University and Irish Basking Shark Group; Queen's University Belfast;
National Parks and Wildlife Service

Making a Difference: how to realize policy change.
1.    Chelsea Gray; Irish Basking Shark Group; George Mason University and
2.    Emmett Johnston; Irish Basking Shark group; Queen's University Belfast; National Parks and Wildlife Service

Shark research and conservation efforts are typically driven by a desire to inform the status assessment and increase the level
of protection afforded to the target species. However, the translation of scientific findings and or conservation initiatives into real
world policy change is a persistent challenge for non-governmental organisations and academics. Basking sharks are listed by
the IUCN as globally endangered. Ireland is significant to basking sharks in the Northeast Atlantic, however until 2022, they
were not protected under domestic legislation. To help others overcome this disconnect we describe and review the methods
that the Irish Basking Shark Group (IBSG), a volunteer research and outreach organisation, deployed to realize a change in
legislative status for the species in Irish waters.
Between 2009 and 2022 the IBSG delivered approximately forty research, outreach and legislative change initiatives designed
to raise the awareness, understanding and appreciation of basking sharks in Irish and International waters. No individual action
or effort stream (i.e., public outreach, scientific research or political lobbying) delivered alone. Rather an integrated approach
that melded internationally significant research studies with locally orientated ocean literacy initiates’ and strategically timed
media campaigns provided the maximum leverage of policy makers.
Lastly, we consider how these experiences can be applied to other species or scaled up to regional forums. Our goal here is to
provide a road map for similar conservation efforts through sharing our experience in attaining protection for the basking shark
in Irish wildlife legislation, the first fish to be given this status.

Keywords: basking shark; science communication; conservation; policy; outreach
SI Abstract Ref: 209




                                                                      Sharks International 2022                           Page 59
Behaviour, Physiology & Discard Survival 2


Lucy Harding
Trinity College Dublin

Capture heats up sharks
1.    Lucy, Harding; Trinity College Dublin
2.    Austin, Gallagher; Beneath the Waves
3.    Andrew, Jackson; Trinity College Dublin
4.    Jenny, Bortoluzzi; Trinity College Dublin
5.    Haley, R, Dolton; Trinity College Dublin
6.    Brendan, Shea; Beneath the Waves
7.    Luke, Harman; University College Cork
8.    David, Edwards; West Cork Charters
9.    Nicholas, Payne; Trinity College Dublin

Catch-and-release fishing is an important component of ecotourism industries and scientific research worldwide, but its total
impact on animal physiology, health and survival is understudied for many species of sharks. We combined biologging and
blood chemistry to explore how this fisheries interaction influenced the physiology of two widely distributed, highly migratory
shark species: blue sharks (Prionace glauca), and tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier). Nineteen sharks were caught by drum line
or rod-and-reel angling; subcutaneous body temperature measurements were taken immediately upon capture, with 6
individuals also providing subsequent subcutaneous body temperature measurements via biologging as they swam freely for
several hours post-release. We found that short-term capture caused shark body temperature to increase significantly and
rapidly, with increases of 0.6 – 2.7°C for blue sharks (mean 1.2 ± 0.6°C) and 0.5 – 0.9°C for tiger sharks (mean 0.7 ± 0.2°C),
and with capture-induced heating rates of blue sharks averaging 0.3°C min-1 but as high as 0.8°C min-1. These heating rates
were 3-8 times faster than maximum rates encountered by our biologging sharks swimming through thermally stratified waters.
Biologging data showed that body temperatures underwent gradual decline after release, returning to match water
temperatures approximately 10 – 40 mins post-release. Blood biochemistry showed variable lactate/glucose levels following
capture; however, these concentrations weren’t correlated with the magnitude of body temperature increase, nor body size or
hooking time. These perturbations of the natural state could have immediate and longer-term effects on the welfare and
ecology of sharks caught and future research could focus on exploring these effects.

Keywords: catch-and-release; body temperature; thermal ecology; physiology; capture
SI Abstract Ref: 96




Hannah Medd
American Shark Conservancy

The recreational shore-based shark fishery in Florida, USA; catch rates, mortality rates and updates
1.    Hannah B. Medd; American Shark Conservancy
2.    Emma Kent; Carleton University
3.    Jessika D. Guay; Carleton University
4.    Jacqueline M. Chapman; Carleton University
5.    Vivian M. Nguyen; Carleton University
6.    Steven J. Cooke; Carleton University
7.    Jill L. Brooks; American Shark Conservancy/Carleton University

Recreational, rod and reel, shore-based shark fishing is a popular activity along the coast of Florida, USA. The recent review of
NOAA’s recreational fishing data resulted in a six-fold increase in the estimation of effort, catch and harvest by all shore-based
anglers. A portion of these data are collected in part by intercepting anglers at fishing access points, however, it may not
capture those involved in shore-based shark fishing which occurs mostly at night in locations with relative low fishing activity.
We analyzed responses to our online survey of Florida shore-based shark fishing permit holders representing a subset that
specifically target great hammerhead (Sphyrna mokarran) to better describe angler demographics, motivations, gear types, and
behaviors. We will also present survivorship data on the great hammerheads caught and released with pop-off archival satellite
tags (PSATs) to estimate the post-release mortality rates of this species in the shore-based fishery and insights into the
diversity of species caught in this fishery, including several species with upcoming stock assessments. These data, both the
human dimension and the mortality rates, are important to decision-makers for calculating Annual Catch Limits across the
commercial and recreational sectors as well as provide evidence for the development of best practices for the angling
community.

Keywords: recreational fisheries; post-release mortality; great hammerhead; human dimension
SI Abstract Ref: 180




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 60
Sofia Graça Aranha
CCMAR, University of Algarve

Stress indicators in deep-sea sharks from bottom trawl fisheries in Southern Portugal
1.    Sofia, Graça Aranha; CCMAR, University of Algarve
2.    Aurélien, Tambuté; University of La Rochelle
3.    Alexandra, Alves; CCMAR, University of Algarve
4.    Pedro, M. Guerreiro; CCMAR, University of Algarve
5.    Ivone, Figueiredo; Portuguese Institute of the Sea and Atmosphere (IPMA)
6.    Pedro, Rocha; University of Algarve
7.    Tiago, Marsili; OLSPS International Lda.
8.    Alexandra, Teodósio; CCMAR, University of Algarve
9.    Teresa, Modesto; CCMAR, University of Algarve

Crustacean bottom-trawlers are responsible for 70% of discards in the south of Portugal and deep-sea sharks are expressive
bycatch, due to their overlap with fishing grounds, low commercial values and/or fishing regulations. Most individuals are
discarded either dead or in poor physical condition. The physiological consequences of this type of capture in elasmobranchs
are poorly understood.
This study analyzed stress-related physiological parameters of four common deep-sea shark, sampled from two different
trawling procedures: one conducted onboard a commercial crustacean bottom-trawler (longer haul duration and heavier codend
weight) and the other conducted onboard a research vessel (shorter haul duration and lighter codend weight).
A total of 120 individuals from the species Etmopterus pusillus, Etmopterus spinax, Galeus melastomus and Scymnodon
ringens were studied. Plasma was collected onboard and frozen until analysis. The concentrations (mmol/L) of plasma
electrolytes (Na+, Cl-, Ca2+, Mg2+) and energy metabolites (glucose, lactate) were measured and related to specific trawling
conditions, specimen vitality and survival.
Differences between commercial and research hauls were observed. Commercial hauls were marked by significantly high
concentrations of Na+, Cl-, Mg2+ and lactate, whilst research hauls presented higher concentrations of glucose and Ca2+.
Specifically, commercial hauls caused significant increases in Cl- and lactate for S. ringens and Na+ for E. pusillus, and a
decrease in glucose concentrations for E. pusillus.
A complete analysis of the relation between physiological stress indicators and trawling variables should provide further insight
to establish additional recommendations to increase the welfare and the effective management of discarded deep-sea sharks.

Keywords: plasma; physiology; secondary responses; conservation; survival
SI Abstract Ref: 335




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 61
Threatened Species – Spotlight on Mackerel Sharks 3


Andrea Bernard
1: Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center; 2: Guy Harvey Research Institute; 3: Nova Southeastern
University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.

Population genomic dynamics of the shortfin mako shark in the Atlantic
1.    Andrea Bernard; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
      Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.
2.    Marissa Mehlrose; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
      Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.
3.    Kimberly Finnegan; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
      Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.
4.    Mahmood Shivji; Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
      Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.

Pelagic sharks are highly threatened by overfishing and in urgent need of science-based conservation management. A key
need is improved information on the population genetic structure and diversity of these ecologically important taxa. The shortfin
mako shark (Isurus oxyrinchus) is an oceanic, globally widespread species known for its capacity for long-distance movements
spanning thousands of kilometers. This species is listed as globally ‘Endangered’ by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species,
and Atlantic makos are considered overfished and in decline. We investigated the population genetic dynamics of shortfin mako
sharks in the Atlantic Ocean using a high-resolution, bi-organelle, multi-marker, genomics approach. We sequenced 86
complete mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes) (16,999-17,002 bp) and genotyped 4236 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 105 sharks across the Atlantic and found contrasting patterns of genetic population structure across DNA markers.
Mitogenome sequences indicated matrilineal population genetic structure across northern and southern hemispheres, while
nuclear-based SNPs showed high connectivity and ocean basin-wide panmixia. Mitogenome genetic diversity in Atlantic
shortfin makos was high compared to other elasmobranchs assessed at the population mitogenome level, and nuclear diversity
was high compared to migratory shark species assessed with SNP markers, boding well for the genetic recovery of Atlantic
shortfin makos if further population declines can be halted.

Keywords: population genomics; shortfin mako shark; connectivity; mitogenome; single nucleotide polymorphism
SI Abstract Ref: 226




Chris Fischer
OCEARCH

Accelerated progress in global shark research and conservation by OCEARCH
1.    Chris Fischer; OCEARCH
2.    Brett McBride; OCEARCH
3.    Robert Hueter; OCEARCH & Mote Marine Laboratory
4.    Nicole Ralston; OCEARCH
5.    Stephanie Brown; OCEARCH

Since 2007, OCEARCH has conducted 44 expeditions in nine countries focusing on comprehensive research and public
awareness of sharks and other marine vertebrates. Our goal is to provide the data to return balance, abundance, and
ecological health to our oceans, starting with rebuilding populations of its top predators. By donating the unique facilities,
capabilities, and skilled crew of our 40m research ship to the scientific community at no cost, OCEARCH provides
unprecedented access to large sharks in the wild for advanced studies of their biology, conservation status, and human
impacts. Using the Google business model to build and monetize scale, we follow these principles to advance shark research:
1) broad collaboration, uniting fishermen, scientists, educators, and policymakers to rapidly increase our knowledge on sharks;
2) the 3Rs of animal research, minimizing the number of sharks needed to answer the maximum number of questions, while
ensuring the health and safety of each shark studied; 3) inclusion, allowing the world to participate in real time through open
access to new scientific data; and 4) innovative funding, from brand-integrated content, conscious consumerism, and
philanthropy. OCEARCH has facilitated the work of more than 200 scientists in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans,
resulting in 75 peer-reviewed publications, and we have advanced public awareness through our Global Shark TrackerTM app
and website, social media, and STEM educational programs. With our multi-year study of the white shark in the Western North
Atlantic completed, we are bringing our ship to Europe and the Mediterranean in 2023.

Keywords: collaboration; open access; business model; Mediterranean; white shark
SI Abstract Ref: 233




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 62
Robert Hueter
OCEARCH & Mote Marine Laboratory

Across the Pond: White shark research from the Western North Atlantic to Europe and the Mediterranean
Sea
1.    Robert Hueter; OCEARCH & Mote Marine Laboratory
2.    Alisa Newton; OCEARCH
3.    John Tyminski; OCEARCH
4.    Brett McBride; OCEARCH
5.    Chris Fischer; OCEARCH

With the completion of a multi-year comprehensive study of white shark biology in the Western North Atlantic (WNA) by
OCEARCH and its collaborators, knowledge of the WNA population has rapidly surpassed the level previously attained in
Australia and New Zealand, South Africa, and the eastern Pacific. A total of 19 expeditions along the North American Atlantic
coast have supported the multidisciplinary work of 45 investigators from 30 organizations to advance 25 individual research
projects. By maximizing the number of projects served and minimizing the handling stress for each individual shark, we applied
the principles of Reduction and Refinement to study spatial ecology and behavior, reproduction, trophic ecology, environmental
health and physiology, population genetics, microbiology and biomedicine, and more aspects of WNA white sharks. Results
include a comprehensive understanding of the life history, critical habitats, and threats to YOY, juvenile, subadult, and adult
white sharks in the WNA, where the population is currently rebuilding. We next turn our attention and resources to the white
shark population of the Eastern North Atlantic (ENA) and Mediterranean Sea, where studies of white sharks have been largely
restricted to fisheries records and anecdotal observations, indicating a declining population. In 17 ENA and Mediterranean
countries to date, we have established a network of 70 researchers from 55 organizations to collaborate in OCEARCH
expeditions in 2023-2025. Focal regions of study will include Scotland, Ireland, England, and France, the western
Mediterranean including Malta and Tunisia, and the eastern Mediterranean including the Aegean and Adriatic Seas.

Keywords: white shark; North Atlantic; Mediterranean; multidisciplinary; OCEARCH
SI Abstract Ref: 231




Alisa L. Newton
OCEARCH; ZooQuatic Laboratory, LLC

Western North Atlantic white shark (Carcharodon carcharias) baseline health assessment and plasma
one-alpha hydroxycorticosterone response during scientific sampling, tagging, and release
1.    Alisa, Newton; OCEARCH; ZooQuatic Laboratory, LLC
2.    Nicole, Stacy; University of Florida, School of Veterinary Medicine
3.    Catharine, Wheaton; Disney's Animals Science and Environment
4.    Carolyn, Cray; University of Miami
5.    Michael, Hyatt; Wildlife Conservation Society, New York Aquarium
6.    Tobey, Curtis; National Marine Fisheries Service
7.    Gregory, Metzger; South Fork Natural History Museum and Nature Center
8.    G. Christopher, Fischer; OCEARCH
9.    Natalie, Mylniczenko; Disney's Animals Science and Environment

Health assessments in wildlife populations are essential to understanding individual animal, in situ population, and ecosystem
health in the face of current and future natural and anthropogenic environmental disturbance. Creating species specific
baselines for health comparisons is a critical need across all elasmobranch species. The effectiveness of conservation
strategies and scientific sampling protocols that involve handling and live release can be impacted by the animals’ physiological
stress response and post-capture mortality. A complete understanding of elasmobranch corticosteroid response to handling,
and how changes in blood biochemistry and acid-base analytes relate to this response and predict post-release survival are
currently lacking. We report the results of health assessments in white sharks (N=74) sampled as part of a multidisciplinary
study in the Western North Atlantic between 2016 and 2022. Physical exam, hematology, plasma chemistry, protein
electrophoresis, and acute phase protein responses were evaluated, and preliminary relative reference intervals created along
with descriptive statistics. We additionally report the one-alpha hydroxycorticosterone (1aOHB) response to scientific handling
of a subset (N=38) of the study animals, using a monoclonal antibody-based enzyme immune assay (EIA). Relationships
between all analytes and biologic data (morphometrics, life-history stage [YOY, juvenile, subadult, adult], season, and region)
were explored. We further compared 1aOHB values with blood chemistry, acid-base and blood gas alterations traditionally
used to monitor stress response. This study creates a baseline for white shark health assessment in the Western North
Atlantic, accounting for intrinsic and extrinsic factors, and contributes to a better understanding of their stress response to
scientific handling.

Keywords: white shark; health assessment; stress physiology; one-alpha hydroxycorticosterone; reference interval
SI Abstract Ref: 282




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 63
Clara Sánchez Latorre
CICIMAR

Ontogenetic trophic shifts in the pelagic thresher shark Alopias pelagicus from both coasts of Baja
California Sur, México
1.    Clara Sánchez Latorre; CICIMAR
2.    Felipe Galván Magaña; CICIMAR
3.    Arturo Tripp Valdez; CICIMAR
4.    Fernando Elorriaga Verplancken; CICIMAR
5.    Alejandra Piñón Gimate; CICIMAR
6.    Antonio Delgado Huertas; IACT (CSIC-UGR)

The pelagic thresher shark is an important species in fisheries of Mexico and Ecuador; however, we know few about their
biology to recommend management or conservation plans. Understanding the life history of pelagic species is important to
ensure their survival. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the trophic ontogeny of Alopias pelagicus from both coasts
of Baja California Sur (BCS), Mexico, based on the analysis of stable isotope ratios of carbon (δ13C) and nitrogen (δ15N) of
vertebra and muscle. A total of 199 vertebral and 73 muscle samples were analyzed. For Bahía Tortugas (Western coast BCS),
mean vertebra isotopic δ15N values were 12.24±1.08‰ (AIR) and δ13C -15.1±0.65‰ (V-PDB); while muscle δ15N values
were 16.59±0.66‰ and δ13C -17.13±0.39‰. For Santa Rosalía (Eastern coast BCS), mean vertebra isotopic δ15N values
were 14.69±1.18‰ and δ13C -14.23±0.55‰; while muscle δ15N values were 17.81±0.8‰ and δ13C -16.4±0.36‰ δ13C.
These results showed higher δ15N values in Santa Rosalía as a result of baseline differences between the two regions;
whereas δ13C values were lower in Bahía Tortugas, suggesting a more oceanic behavior (p<0.05). In Santa Rosalía, there
were significant differences by sex in vertebrae for δ15N; whereas δ13C showed ontogenetic shifts, indicating that neonates
feed on more coastal areas than juveniles or adults (p<0.05). Neither sex nor ontogenetic differences were observed in Bahía
Tortugas (p>0.05), evidencing a high overlap between their isotopic niches. The average trophic level obtained for both tissues
was ~ 4, which corresponds to a tertiary predator.

Keywords: vertebra; muscle; stable isotopes
SI Abstract Ref: 301




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                        Page 64
Sharks & Humans 1


Gabriella Hancock
California State University, Long Beach

Personal experience predicts behavioral indicators of tolerance for interactions with sharks and
stingrays
1.    Katie D. Dudley; California State University, Long Beach
2.    Dede Long; California State University, Long Beach
3.    Christopher G. Lowe; California State University, Long Beach

Global conservation efforts are critical as the world’s ecosystems are under threat from numerous man-made sources.
Humans’ behavioral intentions to support conservancy for diverse species and their habitats are predicated on key intrinsic
(cognitions, beliefs, affects) and extrinsic factors. One such critical extrinsic factor which is subject to individual differences is
former personal experiences with certain animals, such as previous encounters with different species in the wild. This work
examined individuals’ self-reported previous experience with two different animal species (sharks and stingrays) to determine
their effects on behavioral expressions of tolerance (i.e., willingness to engage in activities in the water at beach facilities that
have experienced confirmed sightings of these species within different timeframes). Results inform the design of instructional
and promotional materials intended to promote elasmobranch conservation as well as safety materials (e.g., training, signage)
that convey information pertaining to risk at beach and oceanic recreation facilities.

Keywords: tolerance; conservation; psychology
SI Abstract Ref: 18




Michael Hoarau
Centre Sécurité Requin

Innovative shark mitigation measures tested in Reunion Island towards the reduction of human - shark
interactions
1.    Michael Hoarau ; Centre Sécurité Requin
2.    Jean Gadenne ; Centre Sécurité Requin
3.    Arnault Gauthier ; Centre Sécurité Requin
4.    Eric Hoarau ; Centre Sécurité Requin
5.    Christophe Mulquin ; Centre Sécurité requin
6.    Willy Cail ; Centre Sécurité Requin
7.    Hervé Geollot ; Vigies Requins Renforcées

Since 2011, the intensity of unprovoked human-shark interaction has dramatically increased on the coast of Reunion Island,
with a total of 31 human-shark interactions including 11 fatal shark bites. Most of these interactions occurred within the most
popular beaches of the island.
The main shark species responsible for these interactions is the bull shark (Carcharhinus leucas). Faced with this
unprecedented situation, the French government instituted a ban on all nautical activities around the island and decided to
implement a comprehensive strategy to mitigate the risk of human-shark interactions. To ensure the implementation of this
strategy, the Reunion Shark Security Centre was officially created in April 2016 and became since June 2020 a French
governmental agency. The main objectives of this institution are to coordinate and implement operational mitigation measures
contributing to reduce the shark risk in Reunion, as well as to promote mitigation measures reconciling ocean users’ safety and
the conservation of marine biodiversity using technological innovations.
For the past six years, many innovative mitigation measures have been tested in Reunion waters and other parts of the world.
These measures include a highly regulated shark control program using smart drumlines, the creation of new tools to detect
potentially dangerous sharks, as well as testing commercially available shark deterrent devices. Thanks to all of these
measures, the ban on nautical activities has now been partially lifted in specific areas of the island, with further development to
come in the near future.


Keywords: mitigation measures; bull shark; innovation; shark deterrent
SI Abstract Ref: 91




                                                                      Sharks International 2022                            Page 65
Francesca Pancaldi
WWF Mexico

WWF whale shark management strategy in La Paz Bay: an example of conservation
1.    Francesca, Pancaldi; WWF Mexico
2.    Eduardo, Nájera Hillman; WWF Mexico
3.    Ixchel, López Olvera; WWF Mexico
4.    Dení, Ramírez Macías; Tiburón Ballena México- Conexiones TerraMar
5.    Gloria Mariel, Suárez Gutiérrez; RED de Turismo Sustentable y Desarrollo Social A.C.
6.    Jesús, Martínez Hernández; RED de Turismo Sustentable y Desarrollo Social A.C.
7.    Dilia, Meza Castro; Comisión Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas (CONANP)

The whale shark (Rhincodon typus) is an endangered species that seasonally aggregate in the Bay of La Paz, an important
feeding ground for juvenile individuals. During the last 20 years, touristic activities involving this species has exponentially
increased, growing negative pressure on the animals. Since 2010 The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) in collaboration with the
Foundation Telmex Telcel (Alliance WWF-Foundation Telmex Telcel) support the conservation of the whale shark in this region
of Mexico. Conservation actions so far implemented include funding local scientists to constantly monitor the presence of the
animals and to generate information that is useful in decision-making by the government, encourage education and outreach,
support training for guides and captains involved in the touristic activity, habitat improvement through the maintenance of
Natural Protected Areas in a post-covid context, and the support to the local authorities in the management of the area of
observation. Recently a control center formed by a long distance camara, monitor, and computer was established to guarantee
an efficient vigilance of the touristic activity. These actions have achieved a decrease in the shark injuries of 26% since 2016.
The collaboration between the civil society organizations such as WWF, private entities, researchers, governs, and local
community is essential to achieve the conservation of vulnerable species.


Keywords: whale shark; conservation; civil society organization; management plan; La Paz
SI Abstract Ref: 210




Arnault Gauthier
Centre Sécurité Requin

Are shark deterrents an effective protection against human-shark interactions?
1.    Arnault, Gauthier, Centre Sécurité Requin.
2.    Michaël, Hoarau, Centre Sécurité Requin.
3.    Sébastien, Jaquemet, Université de la Réunion.
4.    Charlie, Huveneers, Flinders University.
5.    Eric, Chateauminois, Centre Sécurité Requin.
6.    Jean, Gadenne, Centre Sécurité Requin.
7.    Eric, Hoarau, Centre Sécurité Requin.

Over the past few years, the number of human-shark interactions have been on the rise globally. A range of measures meant to
mitigate the risk of an interaction has been deployed worldwide, such as preventive fishing or exclusion nets. More recently, the
use of a personal shark deterrent has become a popular option for ocean users. Several types of these shark deterrents exist
and typically rely on optical, olfactive, magnetic, or electrical stimuli to repel sharks that get too close to the wearer. Until
recently, these devices were rarely tested independently and in a robust manner. However, this has now changed and through
these recent studies, we learned that not all of these devices were effective in repelling sharks, and that electric shark
deterrents are generally the most effective type. However, not all of these deterrents are as effective as the others, and their
effectiveness may also vary between shark species.
Throughout this presentation, we will go over the existing types of personal shark deterrents to identify their advantages and
drawbacks, the results of recent investigations on their effectiveness, but also potential future development for this technology.

Keywords: shark bite; shark interactions; shark deterrents
SI Abstract Ref: 194




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 66
Ana Ferreira
Oceanário de Lisboa

The Chondrocensus, a platform for engagement and collaborative conservation.
1.    Ana, Ferreira; Oceanário de Lisboa
2.    Carlos, Taurá; Oceanogràfic Valencia
3.    Jennie, Janssen; National Aquarium
4.    Tony, Niemann; Tracks Data Solutions

The International Census of Chondrichthyans in Human Care (aka the ChondroCensus) launched in 2019 at
www.sharksandraysproject.com, as part of the framework of the Association of Zoos & Aquariums (AZA) Saving Animals From
Extinction (SAFE) Sharks and Rays program. This global census has grown to contain 250 species from 237 facilities across
54 countries world-wide as of May 2022. Besides getting an update count of Chondrichthyans at human care, this platform
intends to make this collection of data a truly useful tool for engaging in meaningful, strategic, and collaborative conservation.
Stakeholder Teams can complete a survey providing basic husbandry info and add their organizational accrediting body. These
data can then be searched by region, organizational accrediting body, genus or species, sex, and the surveyed husbandry
criteria. In addition to streamlining periodic reporting required by organizational accrediting bodies, these new features will also
anonymously connect stakeholders with each other and with the research community to advance husbandry practices and
facilitate collaborative chondrichthyan conservation efforts. Teams always remain anonymous and thus maintain control over
their data, as search results are only shown as the number of Teams per ChondroCensus Region. Thus, each stakeholder
facility’s Team Coordinator holds the critical role of whether their Team chooses to respond to any requests for connection or
information, thereby identifying themselves as stakeholders of the species a search query pertains to.

Keywords: Chondrichthyans; international; census; aquariums
SI Abstract Ref: 228




Leonardo Guida
Australian Marine Conservation Society

Saving Aussie sharks & rays - the conservation needs of threatened endemic elasmobranchs in
Australian waters
Dr Leonardo Guida

Australia is a global hotspot of elasmobranch endemicity, making it a global conservation priority to protect the evolutionary
diversity of elasmobranchs. Australia is one of 21 regionsin the world containing ‘triple threat hotspots’, regions characterised
by the presence of threatened species in high levels of richness, endemicity, and evolutionary distinctiveness.The recent
‘Action Plan for Sharks and Rays 2021’ identifies one third (36%) of Australia’s threatened elasmobranch species being
endemic. South-eastern quadrant of Australia (southern Queensland through to eastern Victoria) is a region with a high level of
incidence of threatened species as a direct result from commercial fishing. Within this region, there are several state-managed
fisheries as well as the federally-managed Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery, Australia’s largest by area and
volume. To address these issues and support the recovery of threatened endemic species, I will highlight the opportunities that
exist in Australian fisheries management, Australia’s environmental laws, and collaborations with NGOs in linking research to
policy. The conservation needs for Australian endemic elasmobranchs are urgent, globally recognised, and forecasted to be
successful if appropriate actions are implemented.

Keywords: endemic; endangered; shark; Australia; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 36




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 67
Friday 14th October, 2022

Sharks and Humans 2


Zalina Bashir Ali
University of Aberdeen, United Kingdom

Using elasmobranch bycatch data to model species distributions and inform conservation management
1.    Zalina Bashir Ali; University of Aberdeen, UK.
2.    Rebekka Allgayer; University of Aberdeen, UK.
3.    Kara Layton; University of Aberdeen, UK.
4.    Aurore Ponchon; University of Aberdeen, UK.
5.    Justin Travis; University of Aberdeen, UK.
6.    Kooi Chee Ho; Marine Research Foundation, Malaysia.
7.    Nicholas Pilcher; Marine Research Foundation, Malaysia.

The short-term socioeconomic impacts of marine spatial conservation measures to the fishing industry, such as the
implementation of no-take zones or marine protected areas, often result in these proposals being met with opposition or
skepticism, at best. Hence, when spatial conservation measures are implemented to protect a target species or population,
they must be strategically located as to maximize their effectiveness, although the field surveys that traditionally underpin this
work are time- and resource-intensive. Researchers are therefore increasingly utilizing species distribution models to identify
locations of high conservation value. In this study, we aim to establish priority areas for the protection of sharks and rays based
on predictions of their distribution in the waters surrounding the Malaysian state of Sabah, in north Borneo. Considering the
global decline of elasmobranchs, it is vital for interventions such as spatial conservation management measures to be
implemented rapidly and effectively. Here, we use extensive, multi-year bycatch datasets from the Marine Research
Foundation for modelling the ranges of species distributions and occurrences of sharks and rays in Sabah. The results of this
work will support recommendations for local elasmobranch management measures.

Keywords: species distribution models; spatial conservation management; Elasmobranch bycatch; Malaysia
SI Abstract Ref: 193




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 68
Technical Innovation in Research Methods 1


Nick Dunn
Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London | Imperial College London

Advancing environmental DNA methods for monitoring sharks and rays
1.    Nicholas Dunn; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London | Imperial College London
2.    David Curnick; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London
3.    David Jiménez Alvarado; Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria | Angel Shark Project
4.    Samantha Andrzejaczek; Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University
5.    Isabel Apetroaie; Imperial College London
6.    Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London | Angel Shark Project
7.    Barbara Block; Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University
8.    Aaron Carlisle; School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware
9.    Taylor Chapple; Hatfield Marine Science Center, Oregon State University
10.   Jake Davies; Zoological Society of London | Natural Resources Wales
11.   Sarah Davies; Zoological Society of London | Natural Resources Wales
12.   Rosalie Dowell; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London | Imperial College London
13.   Francesco Ferretti; Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech
14.   David Jacoby; Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster
15.   Eva Meyers; Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig | Angel Shark Project
16.   Robbie Schallert; Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University
17.   Margaux Steyaert; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London | Oxford University
18.   Sam Weber; Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter
19.   Michael Williamson; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London
20.   Ben Wray; Natural Resources Wales
21.   Vincent Savolainen; Imperial College London
22.   Chris Carbone; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London

In the last decade, there has been an upsurge in the number of studies that utilise environmental DNA for detecting
elasmobranchs, focusing on identifying the presence or absence of species. In this talk, we will explore the application of eDNA
methods for long-term and fine-scale monitoring of elasmobranch species. We will present the results from eDNA
metabarcoding to assess the diversity of elasmobranchs around a remote atoll in the Chagos Archipelago Marine Protected
Area (MPA), showing that eDNA can detect a wide range of elasmobranch species seldom recorded in the MPA. We applied
species-specific eDNA methods to assess the distribution of two dominant reef shark species across the archipelago and show
that detections were significantly higher around the well-protected atoll of Diego Garcia compared to atolls in the north of the
MPA, where detection showed no relationship with concurrent visual surveys or activity hotspots revealed through acoustic
telemetry. We infer that populations around the northern atolls have been suppressed by illegal, unregulated and unreported
(IUU) fishing activity and that eDNA methods may be limited when investigating species at low population density.
In addition, we will showcase how species-specific eDNA methods to investigate the seasonal presence of the Critically
Endangered Angelshark (Squatina squatina) and thornback ray (Raja clavata) over the course of a year in Wales.
Using both case studies, we emphasise the potential of eDNA methods for elasmobranch monitoring and highlight areas of
further research that will be required as they move beyond detection validation into real-world conservation applications.

Keywords: environmental DNA; monitoring; coastal; Marine Protected Area; IUU
SI Abstract Ref: 354



Dr Chantel Elston
South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity

First insights into large-scale movements of a benthic stingray
1.    Paul Cowley; South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity
2.    Taryn Murray; South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity
3.    Matthew Parkinson; South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity

The movements of stingrays have often been quantified over small localized scales however, it still remains largely unknown
whether species display site fidelity or dispersal and to what extent they may connect coastal habitats. This information is vital
to inform population dynamics, ecological roles and best management practices for this threatened faunal group. Blue stingrays
Dasyatis chrysonota, endemic to southern Africa, are hypothesized to move from shallow inshore habitats to deeper offshore
waters during winter, making them a model species to investigate these large-scale movement questions. Twenty-seven
individuals were monitored using the Acoustic Tracking Array Platform (ATAP – a nation-wide network of acoustic receivers) for
up to 4.5 years. Individuals displayed site fidelity to defined regions of the coast with the majority of detections being recorded
in the shallow bay/coastal shelf they were tagged in. However, important movement corridors linking different habitats were
identified (inshore vs offshore and coastal bay vs coastal shelf habitats). Modelling highlighted this habitat use was influenced
by month and temperature, with individuals displaying restricted movements to the shallow bay habitat in summer when deeper
waters were colder. The large collaborative nature of the ATAP allowed for the monitoring of a benthic stingray across large
spatial scales (hundreds of kilometres) for the first time, challenging preconceived notions that small undulatory batoids cannot




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 69
travel large distances (many individuals travelled up to 200 km). Lastly, the current Marine Protected Area zonation may be
insufficient to protect blue stingrays from further population declines in South Africa.

Keywords: acoustic telemetry; South Africa; Dasyatis chrysonota; habitat connectivity; site fidelity
SI Abstract Ref: 324




Stephan Bruns
Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates

The role of Abu Dhabi’s nearshore marine environments in the ecology of elasmobranch fishes
1.    Stephan Bruns, Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates
2.    Aaron C. Henderson, Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates


The present study was undertaken to assess the diversity, relative abundance and habitat association of elasmobranchs fishes
in the nearshore environment on the eastern site of Abu Dhabi, with a focus on how environmental factors impact habitat use
and species composition in the shallow lagoons in the world’s hottest sea. Stereo – baited remote underwater video systems
(Stereo-BRUVS) in combination with continuous abiotic factor monitoring were used to study elasmobranchs within the area. A
great range of environmental changes among the seasons were recorded in salinity and temperature. The video survey
recorded two shark species, the blacktip reef shark Carcharhinus melanopterus and the Arabian carpet shark Chiloscyllium
arabicum, two shark like rays, halavi guitarfish Glaucostegus halavi and the giant guitarfish Rhynchobatus djiddensis and six
ray species, the honeycomb stingray Himantura uarnak, the leopard whipray Himantura leoparda, the pink whipray Pateobatis
fai, the cowtail stingray Pastinachus sp., the Arabic whipray Maculabatis arabica and the eagle ray Aetobatus ocellatus. Despite
the extreme environmental conditions, the habitat is used by a number of batoids, from which three species are declared
critically endangered by the IUCN. This indicates the potential importance of the area in the species life cycle and therefore, the
need of conservation management and continuous environmental monitoring in context of a changing climate.

Keywords: Chondrichthyes; biodiversity; environmental factors; nearshore habitats; stereo-BRUVS
SI Abstract Ref: 298




Amos Barkai
OLSPS, Cape Town Western Cape, South Africa

EMREP - Development of Integrated Electronic Monitoring and Reporting (iEMR) technology for fisheries
in Portugal
1.    Amos, Barkai; OLSPS, Cape Town Western Cape, South Africa
2.    Sofia, Ramos; University of the Algarve, Campus da Penha, 8005-139 Faro

The EMREP project aims to develop technology that integrates electronic reporting (ER) and electronic monitoring (EM)
technologies to create an integrated, onboard, monitoring and reporting solution (iEMR) for commercial fishing fleets. As part
of the project, the iEMR system is being tested onboard a Portuguese bottom-trawl fishing vessel. It provides a combined tool
for the collection of commercial and scientific fishing data, focusing on finding ways to reduce elasmobranch bycatch. The
iEMR system makes use of the Olrac fishing eLog system, presently used on hundreds of vessels across fisheries worldwide.
The Olrac eLog uses advanced data and communication technologies to facilitate a more accurate, reliable, and efficient
approach to the collection, reporting and management of commercial fishing data. Its main advantage is its ability to record
data during fishing operations, which can then be used to compile and send out reports needed by a wide range of interested
and permitted recipients (commercial, scientific, compliance and management, etc.). The system is also linked to a web-server
where data and images from many units across an entire fleet can be stored, analyzed and viewed by different permitted
recipients. This iEMR solution provides an innovative and holistic solution to the ever-increasing demand for high quality data
within the field of fish resource management. The system is simple to use, allows for data of all kinds (numerical, lookups, free
text and images) to be collected and reported and thus transforms every vessel using it into a reliable data collection platform.

Keywords: electronic monitoring; data management; integrating technology; Elasmobranch bycatch; bycatch mapping
SI Abstract Ref: 198




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 70
Jaelen Nicole Myers
James Cook University

Integrating distribution and behavioural data from drones to study fine-scale habitat use of stingrays in
intertidal flats
1.    Jaelen, Myers; James Cook University
2.    Carlo, Mattone; James Cook University
3.    Kevin, Crook; James Cook University
4.    Michael, Bradley; James Cook University
5.    Marcus, Sheaves; James Cook University

Stingrays are ubiquitous in marine ecosystems across the world and perform a variety of functional roles that support
ecosystem health and stability. Coastal intertidal flats provide productive nursery habitats for juvenile rays, making them key
areas to target for conservation and management of at-risk species. However, little research has been dedicated to studying
distribution patterns or behavioural ecology of juvenile rays in estuaries, limiting our capacity to identify critical ray habitats or
understand the roles of different species within them. From 2020-2022, we conducted observational surveys of ray
communities across intertidal estuary flats in North Queensland using unmanned aerial drones (UAVs). Our aim was to
evaluate fine-scale habitat use patterns by integrating spatio-temporal distribution and behavioural data. We found species
compositions varied across locations based on their spatial features, and there was evidence of species-specific habitat
partitioning within sites. Daily movements of rays were generally characterized by individuals moving into the upper intertidal
flats during rising and high tidal periods and returning to subtidal zones during ebb and low periods. Incorporating behaviours
showed that foraging may be a primary driver for these movements, and species-specific behaviours may further contribute to
differential habitat use. In some locations, ray activity was evidenced by dense, patchy clusters of feeding pits, suggesting there
is fine-scale variability for where feeding occurs within larger habitat areas. Overall, making comparisons beyond single-site
contexts broadened our understanding about spatio-temporal distributions of rays in intertidal estuaries. More behavioural
studies will be useful for linking specific activities to ecological functions.

Keywords: habitat use; behaviour; aerial drone; stingray; spatio-temporal distribution
SI Abstract Ref: 38




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 71
Sensory Biology, Feeding Habits & Metabolism 2


Taryn-lee Perrior
Flinders University

The elephant in the room: assessing the foraging ecology of Callorhinchus milii across Australia and
New Zealand
1.    Taryn Perrior; Flinders University
2.    Dr Lauren Meyer; Flinders university
3.    Prof Charlie Huveneers; Flinders University

The functions of mesopredators often overlooked, despite their role as ecologically-vital trophic links. Elephant fish,
Callorhinchus milii, are presumed to be a regionally-important mesopredator across southern Australia and New Zealand, yet
little is known about their ecology. We investigated the foraging ecology of C. milii across two locations in Australia (Bass Strait
and Robe) and New Zealand (Southeast and Southwest) using stomach content, stable isotope and fatty acid analysis to
enable the assessment of spatial variations in feeding across different spatial scales. Callorhinchus milii mostly fed on preys
from non-complex habitat, although diet of C. milli varied between all sampled locations, with differences in muscle being
primarily driven by higher δ13C and 16:0 within Robe and Bass Strait summer identifying more pelagic foraging. Lower δ13C
and higher 20:5ω3 within Bass Strait winter, Southeast and Southwest New Zealand identified non-complex demersal foraging.
In addition to similar ẟ15N, C. milii within Bass Strait summer and winter, and Robe predominantly fed on polychaetes (0.785),
and teleost + cephalopods (0.137), and Southeast New Zealand mostly feeds on polychaetes (0.660) annually. Within liver, the
same trends were seen, although lower δ13C and higher 18:1ω9 within Bass Strait summer, and lower δ13C and higher
22:6ω3 within Southeast New Zealand identified more deep-sea foraging. With similar ẟ15N, C. milii within Bass Strait summer
and winter predominantly fed on polychaetes (0.423) and teleost + cephalopods (0.132), Robe on polychaetes (0.755), and
teleost + cephalopods (0.132), and Southeast New Zealand on teleost + cephalopods (0.504), and crustaceans (0.188)
seasonally. Our findings improve our understanding of C. milii trophic ecology, and chimaera ecology more broadly, for which
minimal information is currently available.

Keywords: chimaera; biochemical tracers; stomach content analysis; trophic ecology; Geographic comparison
SI Abstract Ref: 355




Chloe Roberts
Flinders University

Trophic niche overlap and segregation among elasmobranch predators in a unique island environment
1. Chloe, Roberts; Flinders University
2. Lauren, Meyer; Flinders University
3. Charlie, Huveneers; Flinders University

The processes that allow co-occurring predators to avoid competitive exclusion is the subject of many ecological questions,
with resource partitioning the most widely accepted process enabling coexistence. The degree to which predators overlap or
divide resources can be explored by quantifying their trophic niche, which is a multidimensional space governed by a species’
prey preferences, habitat, and trophic level. Here, we use fatty acids and stable isotopes to quantify trophic niche width and
overlap among tiger (Galeocerdo cuvier), dusky (Carcharhinus obscurus), and Galapagos sharks (Carcharhinus galapagensis)
from Norfolk Island, an isolated offshore island 800 nm off the east coast of Australia, and determine the variation in overlap
across three years. Results reveal substantial overlap between dusky and Galapagos sharks but segregation from the tiger
sharks, with all three species contracting and expanding their trophic niches among years but remaining segregated. Changes
in trophic niches among years highlights predator ability to adapt to fluctuating resources. Yet, niche overlaps between species
remained consistent, indicating stable predatory role and competitive pressure. Temporal variability in the feeding ecology of
marine predators is an important component of species’ ecology to consider when managing populations, since species that
can contract or expand their niche are better able to adapt to environmental change.

Keywords: trophic niche; sharks; stable isotopes; fatty acids; niche overlap
SI Abstract Ref: 312




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 72
Lauren Meyer
Flinders University

The diet of tiger sharks on Norfolk Island inferred from biochemical markers
1.    Lisa Hoopes; Georgia Aquarium
2.    Charlie Huveneers; Flinders University

Norfolk Island is a small island in the Pacific Ocean, ~1,400 km east of Australia that supports a broad diversity of temperate
and tropical marine life, including many shark and pelagic fish species. In particular, Norfolk Island is home to a large
aggregation of mature female tiger sharks Galeocerdo cuvier, with unknown diet, foraging ecology, and movement patterns.
While the reliability of this aggregation makes Norfolk Island an ideal site to uncover the ecology of these top predators, no
work to date has quantitatively explored what tiger sharks consume in this region, or how long they spend in these coastal
waters. The local community has also raised concerns about the disposal of cow offal, rubbish, and fish frames, which are
presumed to attract the tiger sharks that are observed feeding at the disposal sight. Here, we used stable isotopes and fatty
acids from 60 tiger shark blood and muscle samples collected in 2020 and 2021 to quantify the role of cow offal in the diet of
these generalist predators. Despite the frequent observation of tiger sharks consuming cow offal, isotope models suggest that
local seabirds are the predominate prey source for these large tiger sharks sampled around Norfolk Island.

Keywords: fatty acid; isotope; trophic
SI Abstract Ref: 292




Patrick J. Burke
School of Natural Sciences, Maquarie University

Multi-disciplinary approach to reveal trophic niche differences and competition avoidance between two
temperate shark species
1.    Patrick J., Burke; School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University.
2.    Lauren, Meyer; College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University.
3.    Vincent, Raoult; School of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle.
4.    Charlie, Huveneers; College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University.
5.    Jane E., Williamson; School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University.

Quantifying the trophic role of an animal is key to understanding its ecology and ecosystem function. Despite the regular
occurrence of sawsharks in Australian temperate fisheries, there remains limited information on their trophic ecology or niche.
We used fatty acid and stable isotope profiles, along with stomach content analysis to investigate the trophic ecology of two
sympatric species of sawsharks, the common sawshark (Pristiophorus cirratus) and southern sawshark (Pristiophorus
nudipinnis) in south-eastern Australia. C, N and S isotopic analysis of sawshark muscle revealed that P. nudipinnis fed at a
higher trophic level than P. cirratus. Stomach contents also showed that Pristiophorus nudipinnis fed on a mix of benthic and
pelagic species while P. cirratus foraged predominantly on benthic species. This bentho-pelagic partitioning between species
was further supported by fatty acid analysis where P. nudipinnis fatty acid profiles had higher levels of tracers associated with
dinoflagellate basal sources (16:1/16:0, 22:6ω3) than P. cirratus, indicating a reliance on pelagic food webs. These data
suggest that these two sympatric species may display resource partitioning to avoid competition. Furthermore, that these
mesopredators play a substantial role in the pelagic food web which was previously unknown and demonstrates the value of
incorporating multiple biochemical tracers to provide a comprehensive representation of an animals trophic ecology.

Keywords: trophic ecology; sawshark; stable isotope; fatty acid; Australia
SI Abstract Ref: 252




Maria Pozo-Montoro
Macquarie University, Australia

Olfactory capabilities of mako shark and blind shark assessed using anatomical and molecular methods.
1.    Laura Ryan; Macquarie University, Australia.
2.    Oliver Griffith; Macquarie University, Australia.
3.    Jemma Geoghegan; University of Otago, New Zealand.
4.    Nathan Hart; Macquarie University, Australia

Sharks have been associated with an infamously powerful sense of smell. However, research on the sensory biology of this
taxa is still scarce, although it is critical for the development of more selective fishing gear and more efficient shark deterrents.
Notably, the selective pressures that shape the olfactory organs of sharks and their effect on olfactory capabilities are poorly
understood. Here, a multidisciplinary approach combining anatomical and molecular techniques was used to characterise the
olfactory organs of two shark species: the pelagic, shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) and the benthic blind shark (Brachaelurus




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 73
waddi). The total sensory surface area of the olfactory organs—a traditional proxy of olfactory capabilities—is relatively larger in
I. oxyrinchus due to greater coverage of sensory epithelium and more extensive secondary folding of the lamellae. However,
examination of the de novo-assembled olfactory transcriptomes reveals a more diversified olfactory receptor repertoire in B.
waddi. These findings suggest that sharks may rely on different olfactory strategies (i.e. more extensive olfactory organs and/or
more diversified receptor repertoires) that may be related to the characteristics of the water flow within their olfactory organs,
their ecological needs (trade-off sensitivity over diversity of odorants detected) and/or phylogeny. Consequently, these findings
indicate that multidisciplinary studies considering the anatomical and molecular traits of the olfactory system of sharks are
required to fully comprehend the olfactory capabilities of this group.

Keywords: neuroecology; sensory biology; olfactory rosette; RNA-seq; olfactory receptors
SI Abstract Ref: 67




Colombo Estupiñán-Montaño
Fundanción Alium Pacific

Feeding ontogeny of the silky shark, Carcharhinus falciformis, in the Eastern Tropical Pacific of
Colombia.
1.    Colombo Estupiñán-Montaño
2.    Daniel J. Villalobos-Ramírez
3.    Felipe Galván-Magaña
4.    Fernando R. Elorriaga-Verplancken
5.    Manuel J. Zentina-Rejón
6.    Alberto Sánchez-González
7.    Carlos J. Polo-Silva
8.    Antonio Delgado-Huertas6

The trophic patterns of predators are the result of differences in habitat use and the relationship with the environment and their
prey during their life cycle. The study of the feeding ontogeny of large predators is difficult due to their high mobility, which
leaves part of their life poorly understood. This study describes the trophic ontogeny of Carcharhinus falciformis in the
Colombian Pacific. Vertebrae from 12 specimens were analyzed, obtaining a total of 61 vertebral collagen samples grouped
into four maturity stages and eight age groups. The d13C values indicate that the different categories of C. falciformis makes
use of coastal and oceanic zones (-17.8‰ to -14.0‰). The d13C and d15N values (9.4‰ to 12.4‰) suggest that C. falciformis
is a species that can occupy different trophic positions (PTs: 3.4-5.6). Isotopic values estimated in C. falciformis show small
ontogenetic changes in habitat use and prey consumption that were related to age and sex. Additionally, C. falciformis showed
narrow (SEAC: 0.14‰2) and broad (SEAC: 3.16‰2) isotopic niches in the different categories, due to a high trophic interaction
between them. In conclusion, C. falciformis shows a greater preference for oceanic areas, indicating that the oceanic islands of
the southeastern Pacific may be important feeding sites, and Colombian mangroves may be used as potential breeding areas.
In addition, this species reflects ontogenetic changes in area use and prey consumption, which leads the species to occupy
different trophic positions and show changes in feeding-related to body growth/age, as well as two sex-related migratory
patterns.

Keywords: ontogeny; stable isotopes; vertebrae; maturity stages; trophic level
SI Abstract Ref: 40




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                           Page 74
Threatened Species – Spotlight on Angel Sharks, Sawfish & Rhinorays 3


Aylin Ulman
Mersea Marine Consulting

Angel shark (Squatinidae: Squatina squatina, Squatina oculata, Squatina aculeata) records, age
validation techniques, and conservation strategies for Turkey
1.    Emre Yemişken, Istanbul University.
2.    Aylin Ulman, Mersea marine Consulting.
3.    Taner Yildiz, Istanbul University.
4.    Mehmet Gökoğlu, Akdeniz University.
5.    Sara Al Mabruk, Higher Institute Libya.
6.    Lütfiye Eryılmaz, Istanbul University.
7.    Persefoni Megalfonou, University of Athens

Three species of angel sharks are distributed in the Mediterranean Sea (Squatina squatina, Squatina oculata and Squatina
aculaeta), all of which are critically endangered. They only remain now in a few pockets surrounding the Mediterranean basin,
and mostly at alarmingly low levels. These species have considerable knowledge gaps relating to their age and growth. This
study experimented three ageing techniques on Squatina squatina which were unable to yield clear results, due to a lack of
reference data, but can be used to improve future studies. Since 2018, their catch and landing have become prohibited both in
the European Union and Turkey, hence fishers no longer report these catches in fear of penalties. Therefore, each angel shark
record is extremely important in understanding their distribution, habitat use and remaining hotspots with the aim of protecting
their last refuges. This study adds seven new angel shark records for Turkish waters, three Squatina squatina, three Squatina
aculeata and one Squatina oculata, confirming all three species are still currently found in the region and denoting parts of the
Aegean Sea as remaining hotspots. The presence of all three species should warrant immediate conservation actions to
improve their prospects and protect them from localized extinction.


Keywords: fisheries management; aging techniques; Squatinidae; Elasmobranchii; Eastern Mediterranean
SI Abstract Ref: 61




Natascha Wosnick
Universidade Federal do Paraná; Associação MarBrasil

Is release a good strategy for incidentally captured guitarfish? a physiological approach to inform
fisheries management and elasmobranch conservation.
1.    Natascha, Wosnick; Universidade Federal do Paraná, Associação MarBrasil
2.    Eloísa Pinheiro, Giareta; Universidade Federal do Paraná, Associação MarBrasil
3.    Samuel Balanin; Universidade Federal do Paraná, Associação MarBrasil
4.    Leonardo de Paula Rios; Associação MarBrasil
5.    Patricia Charvet; Universidade Federal do Ceará
6.    Renata Daldin Leite; Universidade Federal do Paraná, Associação MarBrasil

One of the main components of effective fisheries management is post-capture survival rates. Globally, Rhino rays are the
most threatened among all vertebrates, and bycatch poses a significant challenge to their conservation. Moreover, most
species are endemic to areas where inspection is scarce and fisheries management is difficult to implement (i.e., low and
middle-low-income countries). In these situations, recovery plans based on fishers' participatory management through bycatch
release is a promising strategy. However, it is necessary to understand how species respond to capture as well as how they
recover from it. The present study aimed to investigate the recovery capacity of incidentally captured Shortnose Guitarfish
through the analysis of energy markers (β-hydroxybutyrate and glucose) and circulating levels of lactate. Zapteryx brevirostris
captured by artisanal fleets were donated to our research group and kept fasted and monitored for 120 hours before release.
Blood samples were collected shortly after capture and right before release. The results indicated that all guitarfish depleted
their β-hydroxybutyrate reserves, concomitant to glucose mobilization and high levels of circulating lactate upon capture,
indicating allostatic overload and lactic acidosis. After 120 hours, all subjects were able to recover their β-hydroxybutyrate
stores, and both glucose and lactate levels were significantly lower. The results indicate great recovery potential in Z.
brevirostris - strongly affected by bycatch despite its low selling price. The species is currently listed as "Endangered" globally,
and recovery plans based on bycatch release proved to be effective based on their recovery capacity.

Keywords: conservation physiology; stress; commercial fisheries; release
SI Abstract Ref: 267




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 75
Technical Innovation in Research Methods 2


Vicky Fong
Marine Megafauna Foundation

Using Drones to Assess Volitional Swimming Kinematics of Manta Ray Behaviors in the Wild
1. Vicky, Fong; Marine Megafauna Foundation.
2. Sarah, Hoffmann; Merck Animal Health.
3. Jessica, Pate; Marine Megafauna Foundation.

Drones have become increasingly popular tools to study marine megafauna but are underutilized in batoid research. We used
drones to collect video data of manta ray (Mobula cf. birostris) swimming and assessed behavior-specific kinematics in
Kinovea, a semi-automated point-tracking software. We describe a ‘resting’ behavior of mantas making use of strong currents
in man-made inlets in addition to known ‘traveling’ and ‘feeding’ behaviors. No significant differences were found between the
swimming speed of traveling and feeding behaviors, although feeding mantas had a significantly higher wingbeat frequency
than traveling mantas. Resting mantas swam at a significantly slower speed and wingbeat frequency, suggesting that they were
continuously swimming with the minimum effort required to maintain position and buoyancy. Swimming speed and wingbeat
frequency of traveling and feeding behaviors overlapped, which could point to other factors such as prey availability and a
transitional behavior, influencing how manta rays swim. Additionally, we present preliminary swimming kinematics data of a
‘surface feeding’ behavior. As ‘surface feeding’ was only observed in larger, and possibly mature, individuals, future research
should investigate any ontogenetic separation of behaviors and kinematics. These baseline swimming kinematic data have
valuable applications to other emerging technologies in manta ray research.

Keywords: manta ray; behavior; kinematics; drones
SI Abstract Ref: 100




Nico Fassbender
University of Western Australia; Marine Futures Lab

Behavioural patterns in marine predators - how does reef habitat complexity affect the distribution and
habitat use of reef sharks?
Nico, Fassbender; University of Western Australia

Increases in shark fishing and the frequency of climate disturbance events in the last decades have led to a global decline in
reef shark populations and degradation of the coral reefs they inhabit. A recent study documented that sharks were absent from
20% of the 371 reefs surveyed (MacNeil et al., 2020). Indian Ocean areas were highlighted as in crucial need of protection and
were identified as having great potential to implement shark-based management approaches.
The aim of this research is to understand how coral reef complexity influences shark habitat use at fine scales. I will use
seabed Baited Remote Underwater Video Systems (BRUVS), acoustic telemetry, faecal DNA (fDNA) swabbing, and coral and
fish diversity and biomass monitoring datasets to document the fine-scale distribution and habitat use patterns of three reef
shark species, the grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos), blacktip reef shark (Carcharinus melanopterus), and
sharptooth lemon shark (Negaprion acutidens). Their behaviour will then be correlated to reef complexity acquired from 3D
structure from motion (SfM) photogrammetry modelling to understand how future reef homogenization may affect shark
behaviour.
The distribution of sharks is frequently studied at large spatial scales over 100s to 1000s of kilometres. My research, focused
on small scale distributions across 100s to 1000s of metres and the drivers of these patterns with respect to habitat complexity
and prey availability, is a novel and conservation-relevant addition to the existing literature. The outcomes of this research can
be utilized by practitioners across the Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific region and will not only further our understanding of the
intrinsic fine scale behaviour of these predators, but aid in the planning, implementation and management of marine protected
areas (MPAs) in the region.

Keywords: reef sharks; habitat complexity; fine scale behaviour; low-cost high-tech; Seychelles
SI Abstract Ref: 106




                                                                   Sharks International 2022                          Page 76
Kathryn Flowers
Florida International University

Drivers of ray sightings on baited remote underwater videos in the tropical Western Atlantic Ocean
1. Elizabeth Babcock; University of Miami.
2. Yannis Papastamatiou; Florida International University.
3. Michael Heithaus; Florida International University.
4. Euan Harvey; Curtin University.
5. Michelle Heupel; Integrated Marine Observing System.
6. Aaron MacNeil; Dalhousie University.
7. Mark Meekan; Australian Institute of Marine Science.
8. Colin Simpfendorfer; James Cook University.
9. Demian Chapman; Mote Marine Laboratory.
**Please note there are many local collaborators who will be co-authors on this work. I will present a slide with all of their
names if my talk is accepted. Thank you for understanding.

Rays are threatened globally by overfishing, habitat loss, climate change, and pollution. In the tropical Western Atlantic Ocean,
rays are part of artisanal, commercial, and recreational fisheries, yet management is sparse and hindered by a lack species-
specific population data. Drivers of ray abundance and habitat use in the region are not well-understood. To address these
knowledge gaps, we compared ray sightings per unit effort (MaxN) across gradients of human pressure (market gravity), fishing
regulations, fishing gear, predator abundance (shark MaxN), and environmental variables using a baited remote underwater
video station (BRUVS) dataset provided by Global FinPrint. Over 3500 BRUVS were set on coral reefs in 17 countries from the
United States to Brazil that detected at least nine ray species (Aetobatus narinari, Hypanus americanus, H. berthalutzae, H.
marianae, Mobula sp., Narcine bancroftii, Pseudobatos lentiginosus, Styracura schmardae, Urobatis jamaicensis). Factors
influencing MaxN of the most common ray species and pooled MaxN of all rays will be presented. We will discuss the
implications of our results for local and regional management.

Keywords: batoids; BRUVS; Caribbean; relative abundance
SI Abstract Ref: 125




Hugo Sanchez Gomez
Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste; Pelagios Kakunja A.C.

The importance of a no-take zone for top predators in the Mexican Pacific: implications for the
conservation and management of predatory fish
1.    Hugo Sanchez Gomez; Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste; Pelagios Kakunja A.C.
2.    James Thomas Ketchum; Pelagios Kakunja A.C.
3.    Edgar Mauricio Hoyos Padilla; Pelagios Kakunja A.C.
4.    Eduardo Francisco Balart Paez; Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste
5.    Miguel Grau Gomez; Pelagios Kakunja A.C.


We used 140 pelagic BRUVS (244 recording hours) to compare the diversity and abundance (MaxNhr) of pelagic fishes
between at a no-take (Revillagigedo Archipelago, RA) and a mostly unprotected region (southwestern Gulf of California, SGC).
While mesopredator fishes such as carangids, snappers and skipjacks dominated the assemblages of the SGC (73.4% of total
abundance), the RA showed a higher dominance of top predators (62.42% of total abundance). Species such as the yellowfin
tuna (Thunnus albacares), silky shark (Carcharhinus falciformis), silvertip shark (C. albimarginatus) and Galapagos shark
(Carcharhinus galapagensis) showed high abundances in the RA. These carcharhinid species showed the highest number of
sightings of all fishes in the RA (frequency of appearance> 50%), which highlights the importance of this marine reserve for the
conservation of predatory fishes. With this information, we intend to establish a baseline for monitoring the pelagic predators in
both regions.


Keywords: sharks; marine reserves; Revillagigedo; conservation; monitoring
SI Abstract Ref: 300




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                           Page 77
Francesco Ferretti
Virginia Tech

From data deficient to big data in shark conservation
1.  Francesco Ferretti; Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
2.  Jeremy Jenrette; Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
3.  Filippo Bargnesi; Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy
4.  Stefano Moro; Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Rome, Italy
5.  Zac Liu; Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, Pacific Grove California, USA
6.  Cheryl Butner; Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, Pacific Grove California, USA
7.  Edward Fox; Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
8.  Steven Haddock; Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, California, USA
9.  Trevor Hastie; Department of Statistics and Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Palo Alto,
    California, USA
10. Salvador Jorgensen; University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, USA
11. Fiorenza Micheli; Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, Pacific Grove California, USA

Sharks are declining rapidly because of their vulnerable life histories and the direct and indirect impacts of fishing and habitat
modification. For this reason, they are among the most endangered animals in the ocean. Meanwhile, they are also among the
most poorly quantified groups of vertebrates on the planet, as basic information on abundance, distribution, and life-history is
lacking for most species. Hence there is an urgent need to collect and analyze data on sharks to increase our understanding of
their ecology, develop effective conservation actions, and reverse their loss. Here we show how crowdsourcing, web data-
mining, and machine learning techniques can fill this critical information gap. We are building the largest database of shark
occurrence records by implementing sharkPulse, a modular crowd-sourcing platform that combines smartphone and web
applications, social network and website crawling, and image analysis to fill knowledge gaps in global shark populations. We
will illustrate the architecture of this platform and show how hundreds of thousands of online images can be sourced and
transformed into shark sightings. We explore the opportunities from crowdsourcing, artificial intelligence, big-data approaches,
and social network mining to quickly and cost-effectively fill major knowledge gaps in shark distribution and characterize their
status and drivers of decline. We also list a series of challenges that need to be addressed to efficiently source this information
continuously and produce efficient and real-time monitoring of global shark populations.

Keywords: citizen science; web data-mining; machine learning; big data; global shark populations
SI Abstract Ref: 337




Jeremy Jenrette
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

Shark detection and classification with machine learning
Jenrette, Jeremy., ZY-C, Liu., Chimote, Pranav., Fox, Edward., Hastie, Trevor., and Ferretti, Francesco

Suitable shark conservation depends on well-informed population assessments. Direct methods such as scientific surveys and
fisheries monitoring are adequate for defining population statuses, but species-specific indices of abundance and distribution
coming from these sources are rare for most shark species. We can rapidly fill these information gaps by boosting media-based
remote monitoring efforts with machine learning and automation.
We created a database of 53,345 shark images covering 219 species of sharks, and packaged object-detection and image
classification models into a Shark Detector bundle. The Shark Detector recognizes and classifies sharks from videos and
images using transfer learning and convolutional neural networks (CNNs). We applied these models to common data-
generation approaches of sharks: collecting occurrence records from photographs taken by the public or citizen scientists,
processing baited remote camera footage and online videos, and data-mining Instagram. We examined the accuracy of each
model and tested genus and species prediction correctness as a result of training data quantity.
The Shark Detector can classify 47 species pertaining to 26 genera. It sorted heterogeneous datasets of images sourced from
Instagram with 91% accuracy and classified species with 70% accuracy. It located sharks in baited remote footage and
YouTube videos with 89% accuracy, and classified located subjects to the species level with 69% accuracy. All data-generation
methods were processed without manual interaction.
As media-based remote monitoring appears to dominate methods for observing sharks in nature, we developed an open-
source Shark Detector to facilitate common identification applications. Prediction accuracy of the software pipeline increases as
more images are added to the training dataset. We provide public access to the software on our GitHub page.

Keywords: data-mining; image classification; Instagram; machine learning; sharks
SI Abstract Ref: 160




                                                                    Sharks International 2022                          Page 78
Kathryn Anne Ayres
CICIMAR-IPN; Pelagios Kakunja

Seasonal aggregations and movements of blacktip sharks (Carcharhinus limbatus) at Cabo Pulmo
National Park, Gulf of California, Mexico
1.    Kathryn, Ayres; CICIMAR-IPN.
2.    James, Ketchum; Pelagios Kakunja.
3.    Rogelio, González Armas; CICIMAR-IPN.
4.    Felipe, Galván Magaña; CICIMAR-IPN.
5.    Alex, Hearn; Universidad San Francisco de Quito.
6.    Fernando, Elorriaga Verplancken; CICIMAR-IPN.
7.    Edgar Mauricio, Hoyos-Padilla; Pelagios Kakunja.
8.    Stephen, Kajiura; Florida Atlantic University.


Blacktip shark (Carcharhinus limbatus) aggregations can be observed along the coastline of Cabo Pulmo National Park
(CPNP), a no-take marine protected area in the Gulf of California. Unoccupied Aerial Vehicle (UAV) surveys were completed bi-
weekly (every two weeks) over a stretch of sandy habitat for three consecutive years between January 2019 and December
2021. C. limbatus abundance ranged between 1 and 1229 sharks (282 ± 43, mean ± SE) in winter months (December – April),
when sea surface temperature (SST) was below 25 °C. Time of day, year and photoperiod were also significant predictors (p <
0.01) of abundance according to the Generalized Additive Model (GAM). Results from sharks tagged with acoustic (n = 20) and
satellite tags (n = 4) indicated a northerly migration in late spring, before returning to CPNP in winter.

Keywords: UAV; aerial survey; acoustic telemetry; satellite tracking; Generalized Additive Model
SI Abstract Ref: 104




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                      Page 79
Threatened Species – Spotlight on Angel Sharks, Sawfish & Rhinorays 4


Charlotte Pike
Zoological Society of London | Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands

Establishing a method to identify and prioritise areas for protection of Angelshark (Squatina squatina) in
the Canary Islands.
1.    Maria Belén Caro; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
2.    Hector Toledo; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
3.    David Jiménez Alvarado; Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
4.    Eva Meyers; Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
5.    Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
6.    Michael Sealey; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
7.    Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
8.    Matthew Gollock; Zoological Society of London


The Angelshark (Squatina squatina) was formerly common across the East Atlantic and Mediterranean Seas, but has
undergone dramatic declines over the last 50 years. Despite this reduction, the Canary Islands remain a uniquely large
stronghold for the species, where Angelsharks can still be observed frequently. Protection of Angelsharks in the Canary Islands
is therefore of vital importance to ensure the survival of the species, as threats such as habitat loss and accidental capture in
fisheries still impact Angelsharks in these waters.
In 2019, Angelsharks were listed in the Spanish Endangered Species List for Canary Islands waters, under the category “In
danger of extinction”. In accordance with this listing, it was required that a Recovery Plan be developed, including the
delineation of areas relevant to the conservation of the Angelsharks (ARCAs), where specific measures should be
implemented.
In order to identify ARCAs in the Canary Islands, Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands (ASP:CI) completed geospatial analysis
of Angelshark distribution using available data, from both scientific surveys and citizen science sightings. Using this data,
alongside current knowledge of Angelshark ecology, ASP:CI were able to determine specific criteria to delineate ARCAs in the
Canary Islands. We will present these methods whilst discussing the limitations related to designating critical areas for data
limited species, and highlighting the importance of translating scientific evidence into policy action.
This work, led by ASP:CI, was funded by Shark Conservation Fund and through a contract with the Canary Islands
Government, co-financed by the FEDER 2014-2020 Operational Program.

Keywords: Angelshark; distribution; mapping; spatial protection; management
SI Abstract Ref: 332




Veronika Biskis
University of the Sunshine Coast

Sawfish spotters fill data gaps critical for protection in Queensland, Australia
1.    Veronika Biskis, University of the Sunshine Coast.
2.    Dr Kathy Townsend, University of the Sunshine Coast
3.    Dr Barbara Wueringer, Sharks And Rays Australia

In Australia, effective management of critically endangered sawfishes is a difficult task, in part due to remaining habitat being
extremely remote and expensive to reach. Since the federal recovery plan was put in place in 2015, field investigation in
Queensland has been limited to a select few river systems, not allowing for a full-scale species distribution assessment.
In 2017, Sharks And Rays Australia launched a public sightings campaign targeted at recreational fishers to fill knowledge gaps
in population abundance and spatial ecology. Since then, over 950 submissions have been received Australia-wide from
members of the public. Data from Queensland encounters reported to have taken place between 1998 and 2022 were
analysed, representing equal temporal distribution before and after federal protection.
Sighting locations were analysed for association with commercial and recreational fishing pressure and environmental
protection measures. Size and year of capture were shown to be negatively correlated, even over a relatively short time span of
20 years. Condition of the animal also varied with species, size and method of capture, indicating a varied impact on sawfishes
through different fishing methods.
This study provides first insights into key habitat for different life history stages on the Queensland coast since becoming
federally protected. Additionally, findings highlight the importance of citizen science as a reliable data source, and a platform for
the direct involvement of the recreational fishing community in protecting critically endangered species.

Keywords: sawfish; citizen science; fisheries; distribution; conservation
SI Abstract Ref: 347




                                                                     Sharks International 2022                          Page 80
Michael James Sealey
Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands

The value of citizen science “Count the Angels” events towards the study of Angelsharks (Squatina
squatina) in the Canary Islands.
1.    Michael James, Sealey; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
2.    Leire, Gabiola Hernández; Universidad de Alicante
3.    Joanna, Barker; Zoological Society of London & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
4.    Charlotte, Pike; Zoological Society of London & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
5.    Héctor, Toledo; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
6.    Belén, Caro; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
7.    Eva, Meyers; Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
8.    David, Jiménez-Alvarado; Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
9.    Alexander Lehnen; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands


As the popularity of recreational scuba diving grows, so does the will of scuba divers to contribute towards the protection and
conservation of the marine environment. This growth has been accompanied by the establishment of a citizen science
movement aimed to engage and recruit scuba divers in data collection for research. This innovative tool has been used in the
Canary Islands to gather data on the Critically Endangered Angelshark (Squatina squatina) through an annual event named
Count the Angels (CTA), which has been completed for four years (2018-2021).

The CTA event is organised under the direction and supervision of the Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands. During four days,
participating dive centres and clubs carry out two coordinated dives at scheduled hours and register specific data, including
Angelshark sightings. The last CTA event was held from the 4 to the 7 of December 2021, with a total of 37 participating dive
centres and clubs, 107 dives registered and a total of 166 Angelsharks recorded throughout five of the Canary Islands. The
collected data has allowed different analysis including shark size and sex ratio, behaviour patterns, encounter probability and
abundance estimates for the different islands.

This unique and growing event is an example of how citizen science can be a valuable tool not only to support Angelshark
research, but also as a mechanism to create awareness and engage scuba divers towards the conservation of a Critically
Endangered species.

CTA events were funded by Shark Conservation Fund, Disney Conservation Fund and WWF Netherlands.


Keywords: Angelshark; canary islands; citizen science; scuba divers
SI Abstract Ref: 352




Rima Jabado
Elasmo Project, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Rhino rays – uncovering the drivers behind their exploitation in data-poor areas
1.  Rima W. Jabado, Elasmo Project, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
2.  Niang Alioune, Institut Mauritanien de Recherches Océanographiques et de Pêches (IMROP), Mauritania
3.  Mamadou Ba, Parc National du Banc d’Arguin (PNBA), Mauritania
4.  Luc B. Badji, Institut Universitaire de pêche et d’Aquaculture (IUPA), Dakar, Sénégal
5.  Alissa Barnes, Elasmo Project, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
6.  Helene Buchholzer, Blue Resources Trust, Colombo, Sri Lanka
7.  Daniel Fernando, Blue Resources Trust, Colombo, Sri Lanka
8.  Ramajeyam Gobiraj, Blue Resources Trust, Colombo, Sri Lanka
9.  Divya Karnad, Department of Environmental Studies, Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana, India
10. Buddhi Maheshika, Blue Resources Trust, Colombo, Sri Lanka
11. Sushmita Mukherji, CSIRO-UTAS Quantitative Marine Sciences PhD Program, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies,
    University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
12. Akshay Tanna, Blue Resources Trust, Colombo, Sri Lanka
13. Sahan Thilakaratna, Blue Resources Trust, Colombo, Sri Lanka


Rhino rays are facing a global conservation crisis. These 67 species (families Pristidae (Sawfishes), Glaucostegidae (Giant
Guitarfishes), Rhinidae (Wedgefishes), Rhinobatidae (Guitarfishes), and Trygonorrhinidae (Banjo Rays)) have limited
productivity making them extremely susceptible to overexploitation. Rhino rays face an uncertain future with 68.7% considered
threatened with extinction according to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. We focus on understanding the status and
uncovering the drivers behind their exploitation in four data-poor countries: India, Mauritania, Senegal, and Sri Lanka. These
species richness or endemicity hotspots are data-poor in terms of fisheries, have some of the poorest coastal communities, and
species’ distributions overlap with intense and increasing fishing pressure. Data were collected by interviewing fishers and
traders to record historical knowledge and current perceptions, as well as landing site surveys to collect data on species and



                                                                   Sharks International 2022                         Page 81
assess how fisheries impact them. Results suggest that species exploitation is not always driven by the fin trade but also by
demand for their meat, often consumed locally. Landing site surveys indicate a low abundance of species while fishers describe
historical high abundances, indicative of potential localized extinctions going unnoticed. The complexities in understanding
these fisheries at the local scale highlight that conventional fisheries management measures are unlikely to yield results,
especially when governance is weak in terms of enforcement and policy implementation. Adaptive local actions are needed
with solutions based on fisher engagement to ensure their livelihoods and nutritional needs are taken into consideration while
identifying potential mitigation measures or solutions to reduce demand.

Keywords: conservation; threatened species; guitarfish; wedgefish; Rhinopristiformes
SI Abstract Ref: 170




                                                                 Sharks International 2022                        Page 82
Posters (Online)

Ana Lúcia Furtado Soares
Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, University of Munich
Elasmobranch fisheries in Angola: a fishers’ perspective


Andhika Prima Prasetyo
Centre Fisheries Research, Ministry for Marine Affairs and Fisheries, Indonesia
Shark-dust: High-throughput DNA sequencing of processing residues unveils rife trade in endangered
sharks and rays


Alan Heriberto Delgado Ramos
Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas (CICIMAR)-IPN
Reproductive biology of the grey smoothhound Mustelus californicus (Gill, 1864) in Bahía Tortugas, Baja
California Sur, México.


Akshay Tanna
Blue Resources Trust
Where have all the sawfishes gone? Perspectives on declines of these Critically Endangered species in
Sri Lanka


Amanda Pontes Lopes
Laboratory of Environmental Health Assessment and Promotion, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz/Fiocruz, Av. Brazil, 4.365,
Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, 21040-360, Brazil 1; Postgraduate Program in Biodiversity and Health (PPGBS), Instituto
Oswaldo Cruz/Fiocruz 2; Department of Chemistry, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Rua Marquês de
São Vicente, 225, Gávea, 22453-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 3; Center for Food Analysis, Technological Development
Support Laboratory, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Cidade Universitária 21941-598, RJ, Brazil 4; National Institute of
Health Quality Control, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro 21040-900, RJ, Brazil 5; Graduate Program in Sanitary
Surveillance (PPGVS), National Institute of Health Quality Control 6;
Lanthanum contamination in Groovebelly Stingray (Dasyatis hypostigma) in the tropical Southeast
Atlantic


Amanda Pontes Lopes
Laboratory of Environmental Health Assessment and Promotion, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz/Fiocruz, Av. Brazil, 4.365,
Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, 21040-360, Brazil 1; Postgraduate Program in Biodiversity and Health, Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz/Fiocruz 2; Department of Chemistry, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Rua Marquês de São
Vicente, 225, Gávea, 22453-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 3;
Ampullae of Lorenzini Ti and As contamination in Groovebelly Stingrays (Dasyatis hypostigma) from the
tropical Southeast Atlantic


Antonia Klöcker
Institute of Marine Research (IMR)
On the edge – Deciphering migration patterns of basking sharks in the Arctic


Amani Webber-Schultz
Friday Harbor Labs; New Jersey Institute of Technology
Comparative Morphology and Flow Analysis of Dermal Denticles at the Nares of the Pacific Spiny
Dogfish, Squalus suckleyi


Pierluigi Carbonara
COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca
Trophic niche and feeding behavior of the blue shark, Prionace glauca, in the South Adriatic Sea (Central
Mediterranean)




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                      Page 83
Jorge I. Rosales-Vásquez
1 Fundacion Mexico Azul; 2 Grupo de Investigadores Libres Sphyrna
New record of the eastern Pacific black ghost shark Hydrolagus melanophasma James, Ebert, Long &
Didier, 2009 (Chondrichtyes, Holocephalii, Chimaeriformes) from Cabo San Lucas, Baja California,
México


Catarina Pereira Santos
MARE | Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre
Sharks in the anthropocene - a systematic map of global research efforts


Carlos Daniel Becerra Hernández
Laboratorio de Ecología de la Salud, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí.
Presencia de microplásticos en contenido estomacal de tiburones del Pacífico Norte Mexicano.


Andrea Di Tommaso
Università della Calabria
Spatio-temporal distribution of Carcharhinus melanopterus in Koh Tao (Thailand) through UAV


Francesco Maria Achille Consoli
Veterinary Histology and Pathology, Atlantic Center for Cetacean Research, University Institute of Animal Health and Food
Safety (IUSA), University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Arucas, Las Palmas, Spain 1.
Anatomical study of the head of the Angelshark (Squatina squatina) by diagnostic imaging techniques

Francesco Maria Achille Consoli
Veterinary Histology and Pathology, Atlantic Center for Cetacean Research, University Institute of Animal Health and Food
Safety (IUSA), University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Arucas, Las Palmas, Spain
Ultrasound as a diagnostic imaging tool for studying the internal anatomy of the Angelshark (Squatina
squatina)


Frida Lara Lizardi
Orgcas/ Migramar
A new approach for shark conservation, Proyecto Tiburón


Georgios Rallis
iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems
Discovering the feeding habits of rays in the Ambracian Gulf


Gustavo Montero Hernández
Institute for Animal Health and Food Safety (IUSA), Veterinary School, Universidad Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (ULPGC),
Arucas, Spain; Department of Mathematics, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Campus de Tafira, Las Palmas de
Gran Canaria, Spain; Aquarium Poema del Mar, Fundación Loro Parque (Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain)
Hematological and plasma biochemical parameters of the round stingray (taeniura grabata)


Harriet Allen
Shark Trust
20 years of the Great Eggcase Hunt


Harriet Allen
Shark Trust
Shark Log – a citizen science project


J. Juan Rendón-Herrera
Facultad de Ciencias del Mar, Universidad Autónoma de Sinaloa, Mazatlán, Mexico; Cátedras CONACYT, Consejo Nacional
de Ciencia y Tecnología, CDMX, Mexico.
Multiple Paternity in two smooth-hound sharks from the northern Gulf of California




                                                                 Sharks International 2022                        Page 84
Katherin Soto-López
Escuela de Sistemas Biológicos e Innovación Tecnológica Universidad Autónoma Benito Juárez de Oaxaca; Centro
Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas (CICIMAR)- IPN
First record of clasper malformation of Pseudobatos buthi (Chondrichthyes: Rhinobatidae) in the Gulf of
California


Zaccagnini Lucas
Institut Universitaire Européen de la Mer ; Des Requins et des Hommes
Environmental DNA detection of threatened shark species and commercially valuable tuna genus on an
unstudied seamount in the Colombian Pacific Ocean


Marja J. Kipperman
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and the Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, EH25 9RG, Edinburgh, UK
Conservation genetics of the Bowmouth guitarfish (Rhina ancylostoma) in the Indian Ocean


Marcela Alvarenga de Almeida Simões
CIBIO, Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, InBIO Associate Laboratory – Universidade do Porto, Campus
de Vairão, Vairão 4485-661, Portugal; BIOPOLIS Program in Genomics, Biodiversity and Land Planning, Campus de Vairão,
Vairão 4485-661, Portugal; Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Porto 4099-002,
Portugal; Faculdade de Ciências e Letras de Assis, Universidade Estadual Paulista “Júlio de Mesquita Filho” (UNESP), Assis
19806-900, São Paulo, Brasil; Department of Marine Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Marine Science Institute, Port
Aransas 78373, Texas, USA; Universidade do Estado de Minas Gerais (UEMG), Frutal 38200-000, Minas Gerais, Brasil;
Instituto de Biociências de Botucatu (IBB), Universidade Estadual Paulista “Júlio de Mesquita Filho” (UNESP), Botucatu 18618-
689, São Paulo, Brasil;
Years of extensive and inadvertent consumption of endangered sharks and rays in Brazil unraveled
through DNA analysis: How can we do better?


Mohsen Rezaie-Atagholipour
Qeshm Environmental Conservation Institute (QECI), Qeshm Island, Hormozgan, Iran
Flat and fragile: threats to rays in Iranian waters


Nidhi Gloria D'Costa
Institution 1: Recent Graduate from Marine Affairs Program, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada; Institution 2:
Research Assistant at Worm Lab, Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada; Institution 3:
Research collaboration with Environmental Markets Lab, University of California, Santa Barbara, 93117, United States.
Identifying priority areas for shark conservation through the lens of global anti-finning legislations


Pablo Morón-Elorza
Fundación Oceanografic
Capillary Zone Plasma Protein Electrophoresis Analysis in Nursehound Sharks (Scyliorhinus stellaris)
Maintained Under Human Care

Abaut Paul
Des Requins et Des Hommes
Photo- Identification catalogue : a free diving and collaborative project to evaluate porbeagle shark(
Lamna nasus) ecological behavior off Brittany French costs ...or further !


Pablo Dufflocq
Food Quality Research Center - Universidad de Chile
Assessing food fraud in the Chilean chondrichthyans meat market


Pablo Dufflocq
Food Quality Research Center
Population structure of Shortfin Mako and Porbeagle shark: two highly migratory and threatened species
present in Chile




                                                                 Sharks International 2022                        Page 85
Ruben Dario Morales-Gamba
Federal University of Amazonas;National Institute of Amazonian Research
Progesterone receptors and sperm aggregates in active male genital ducts of Potamotrygon wallacei
(Chondrichthyes - Potamotrygonidae)


Ryan J. Nevatte
School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, New South Wales, Australia
Crossed saws: Evidence of hybridisation between Australian sawsharks


Sergio Madrigal-Mora
Department of Biological Science and Mathematics California State University Long Beach.
Movement and residency patterns of Ginglymostoma unami in a Marine Management Area in the north
Pacific coast of Costa Rica.


Thomaz Stefani Fuzetti
Universidade Federal do Paraná (UFPR); Universidade Federal do Ceará (UFC).
Diagnosis of recreational shark and ray fishing off the coast of São Paulo, southeastern Brazil


Vasco Pissarra
Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre (MARE), Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa (FCUL), 2750-374
Cascais, Portugal.
Fishermen’s perceptions on the importance and use of sharks in sao tome island (gulf of guinea, west
africa)


Dalrun Kaldakvisl
Laxfiskar
Shark fishing in Iceland. A marine environmental history


Yan Torres
1. Marine Vertebrate Evolution and Conservation Lab – EvolVe, Departamento de Biologia, Centro de Ciências,, Universidade
Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza, Campus do Pici, Bloco 909, 60440-900, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil
Spotting the gaps: frontiers in Potamotrygoninae genetics


Zachary Mühlenweg
Archipelagos Institute of Marine Conservation
Establishing a Protocol for Coastal Elasmobranch Biodiversity Assessments


Agustí Torres
SHARK MED
Innovative BRUVs to support knowledge and conservation of sharks in the Balearic islands through
citizen science


Gislayne Mendoza
San Francisco de Quito University
Validating taxonomic entities from the eagle rays in the Eastern Tropical Pacific: the presence of
Aetobatus ocellatus in Galapagos (Ecuador)


Lydie Couturier
Environmental Integration Programme, France Energies Marines
Monitoring the habitat use and movements of sharks and rays in a context of offshore wind energy
development

Rachel M. Aitchison
Pacific Shark Research Center, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, San Jose State University, Moss Landing, CA, USA
Redescription of Southwestern Indian Ocean Rhinobatos (Rhinopristiformes: Rhinobatidae)




                                                                Sharks International 2022                      Page 86
Dr Chantel Elston
South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity
Seasonal estuary use by stingrays in South Africa


Arlin Gabriela Ramos Rodriguez
Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Quintana Roo, Unidad Acádemica Cozumel, Quintana Roo, Av. Andrés Quintana Roo,
Colonia San Gervasio, C.P. 77600 Cozumel, Mexico.
Age and growth of the banded guitarfish, Zapteryx exasperata (Jordan & Gilbert 1880), in the Gulf of
California, México.


Stephen Bergacker
Université libre de Bruxelles; Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Biogeography of Indo-Pacific Spotted Eagle Rays (Aetobatus ocellatus)


Mauro Sinopoli
Department of Integrative Ecology (EMI), Interdepartmental Centre of Sicily, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - Italian National
Institute for Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Palermo, Italy.
First observations on the feeding habit of the blackspotted smooth-hound, Mustelus punctulatus, from
the Marine Protected Area of the Egadi Islands (Central Mediterranean Sea)


Danielle Davenport
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland
Genetic signatures of population decline in white shark (Carcharodon carcharias, L.) populations: a
natural history investigation.


Hannah Rudd
Angling Trust
Shark Hub UK: A model for building and maintaining resilient relationships between recreational shark
anglers and scientists to research and conserve sharks


Shigehiro Kuraku
National Institute of Genetics, Japan; RIKEN BDR, Japan
Squalomix: consortium for analyzing chondrichthyan fish genome sequences




                                                                  Sharks International 2022                        Page 87
